negotiation
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CHqKzwgjFKA


AWS
aws is a secure cloud services platform, offering compute power, database storage, content delivery and other functionality to help businesses scale and grow.

virtual machine = EC2 instance, elastic compute instance

Benfit - Easy to use, flexible, cost-effective , reliable, scalable and high performance, secure

AWS CSA - Cloud Security Alliance 

Course content
Introduction
Amazon free tier account
Amazon EC2	= virtual machine
Amazon Storage	= EBS(elastic block storage), Object level, block level,S3, EFS elastic file system 
Amazon Networking = VPS, Subnet, Route table, routing, 
Amazon Managment tools	= monitor
Amazon IAM = Identy and access managment, we can create different user, and assign access on different VMs
AWS Directory Service

Introduction to cloud Computing
What is Cloud Computing?
Type of cloud Computing?
AWS Architecture
AWS Managment Console
Setting up the AWS Account

Amazon EC2
How to create virtual machines in AWS
Amazon Lightsail
Elastic Beanstalk
Types of EC2 instances
Amazon AMIs and snapshots
Backups and Restore
Networking and security groups
Awazon Scaling service : ELB & Autoscaling

Amazon 	Storage
We will cover different storage services like S3, EBS, EFS
How to store data in S3 buckets
How to host a static website in S3

Amazon Networking
What is VPC? = virtual private cloud
How to create VPC
How to make public and private subnets in AWS
How to define Gateways
How to define Routes in Route Tables
Elastic ips = static ip
VPC Peering = if 2 different account A, B, and we want to connect A EC2 machine with B EC2 machine with VPC Peering

AWS Identity and Access Managment
How to setup users and groups
How to restrict access on resources so that only authorized users can access the resource
How to enable MFA (Multi Factor Authentication)	= gmail login, like msg receive on your mobile, if unknow login place

AWS Services
Cloud Watch
SNS (Simple Notification Service)
SES (Simple Email Service)
AWS Work mail
AWS Work docs
AWS Billing Dashboard
AWS Import/Export (Snow ball)
AWS Route53
AWS Databases
AWS Regions & Availability Zones


Certification roadmap

Role-Based Certifications 		validity 2 years
Foundational
Associate		Solutions Architect, Developer, SysOps Administration
Professional		Solutions Architect, Developer, DevOps Engineer

Architect: Technical knowledge for solutions architects, solution design engineers, and anyone who designs appliations and systems on AWS

Developer : Techincal knowledge for software developers who develop cloud applications on AWS

Operations : Techincal knowledge for SysOps administrators, systems administrators, and those in a DevOps role who create automatable and repeatable deloyments, networks, and systems on the AWS Platform. 

Speciality Certifications - must have 1 role-based certification

Advanced Networking 

Big Data



..................

What is cloud
The term cloud refers to a network or internet
we can say that cloud is something which is present on remote location and is accessiable only through the internet

What is cloud computing
cloud computing means storing and accessing data and programs over the internet instead of your computer's hardware

we can create, configure and custimize applications online

with cloud computing users can access cloud resources from anywhere in the world, you just need an access to the internet

cloud computing is both a combination of s/w and h/w based computing resource delivered as a network service

Dont need to worry about the maintenance of your resources

Cloud Computing Architecture
Application
Platform
Infrastructure

Models for cloud Computing
There are some models working behind and making cloud computing feasible and accessible to cloud users
Deployment Models : you can say that how your cloud is configured.
	Public : your all resources and instances which you have configured are accessible to public over internet. It is less secure, webmail
	Private: your all instances are accessiable only to your organization. it is more secure.
	Hybrid : mixture of private and public
	Community : your instances are accessiable to some group of organizations.

Service Models :
Infrastructure as a service(IAAS): is form of cloud computing that provides virtualized computing resources over the internet.
IAAS provides access to fundamental resources such as physical machines, virtual storages etc.
Usally billed on usage
Usually multi tenant virtualized environment - (From different pool, we assigned mutliple RAM, Hard Disk)

platform as a service(PAAS): it provides you computing platforms which typically include operating systems, Database, Web server etc.
For instance, if you are a PHP developer you dont need to setup the entire system

software as a service(SAAS) : allows to use s/w applications as a service to end users.
SAAS is a s/w delivery methodology that provides licensed multi tenant access to s/w and its fuctions remotely as a web based service.
A common example of a SaaS application is web-based email where you can send and receive email without having to manage feature additions to the email product or maintaining the servers and operating systems that the email program is running on.
e.g. Remote Desktop Services

Advantages
cost efficient
Unlimited storage
Quick Deployment	
Easy access of your resources
Scalable and Reliable
Instant S/w updates
Device Independence(Mobile, Tab, Laptop)
Reduce maintenance

Disadvantages 
Constant Internet connection
High Speed Internet connection
security
stored data can be lost

....................

Free tier account
offer 12 months free
https://portal.aws.amazon.com/billing/signup

AWS Free tier services
Amazon EC2 750 Hours per month
Amazon EFS 5GB per month
Amazon RDS 750 Hours per month
Amazon S3 5GB of Standard Storage
Amazon ELB 750 Hours per month
Amazon Directory Service 1 month Free
1 Elastic IP Free
https://aws.amazon.com/free

AWS Regions - country wise (and in different country have different availabe Zones)
Each region is a seprate geographic area. Each region has multiple, isolated locations known as Availability Zones.
Amazon EC2 is hosted in multiple locations world-wide. These locations are composed of regions and Availability Zones.
Amazon EC2 provides you the ability to place resources, such as instances, and data in multiple locations.

Regions & Number of Availability Zones
Us East, Us west
Asia Pacific, canada, China, Europe
South America, AWS GovCloud (Us-West)

Best practice, whenever you place resource place on 2 Availality Zone in 1 Region

AWS Global Infrastructure
53 availablity Zones within 18 geographic regions and 1 local region around world

To find your regions and availability Zones console Open the Amazon EC2 Console
https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/

Show AWS region ping latency
https://cloudping.info

chech availability zone - region - EC2 Dashboard - Availability Zone

Scopes of different AWS Services

AZ			Regional		Global
EC2 Instance		S3 Bucket		IAM Entities (Users, Groups,Roles & policies
EBS Volume		AMI			Route53
RDS Instance		Snapshot(EBS/RDS)	CloudFront
Redshift Node		DynamoDB		Distribution
subnets			VPC
Elastic File		Elastic IP
System			SQS, SNS
			CloudWatch Metrics

Service Limits
When you create your AWS account, Amazon sets default limits on these resources on a per-region basis.
Amazon EC2 provides different resources that you can use. These resources use images, instances, volumes and snapshots.
To-view your current limits, Open the Amazon EC2 console at 
https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/

To-view the AWS service limit open the following link
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/aws_service_limits.html

Limits - EC2 Service limits - Instance Limit (On-Demand,Spot requests, Reserved Instance,Dedicated )
On demand

...........
EC2
Amazon Elastic compute cloud is Web service that provides resizable compute capacity in the cloud. Amazon EC2 reduces the time required to obtain and boot new server instances to minutes, allowing you to quickly scale capacity, both up and down, as your computing requirements change.

EC2 options

On Demand - allow you to pay a fixed rate by the hour with no commitment. billing on sec also(linux already applied, windows not applied, 35 min used billing will be 1 hour)

Users that want the low cost and flexibility of Amazon EC2 without any upfront payment or long-term commitment.
applications with short term, spiky,or unpredictable workloads that cannot be interrupted.
applications being developed or tested on Amazon EC2 for the first time.
A new billing cycle starts whenever an instance change to "Running" state.

Reserved (multi tenant)- provide you with a capacity reservation, and offer a significant discount on the hourly charge for an instance. With full upfront, partial upfront and no upfront. 1 year or 3 year term.

Applications with steady state or predictable usage
You can re-sell on AWS if you choose not to use
Users able to make upfront payments to reduce their total computing costs even further
	Standard RI's (Up to 75% off on demand)
	Convertable RI's (Up to 54 % off on demand) capability to change the attributes of the RI as long as the exchange results in the creation of Reserved Instances of equal or greater values.
	Scheduled RI's available to launch within the time windows you reserve. This option allows you to match your capacity reservation to a predictable recurring schedule that only requires a fraction of a day, a week, or a month.
Full upfront will get 75% discount can get.

Spot - enable you to bid whatever price you want for instance capacity, providing for even greater savings if your applications have flexible start and end times.

Applications that have flexible start and end times
Unused capacity at AWS is given in market for bidding 
look at pricing history and decide bid price
instances are terminated with 2 minutes notice when market price goes above bid price
If terminated by AWS, last partial hour is free
Optionally, use spot block option with bid to block the instance (maximum 6 hours)

Dedicated - Physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. Dedicated hosts can help you reduce costs by allowing to use your existing server-bound s/w licenses.

Useful for regulatory requirments that may not support multi-tenant virtualization.
great for licensing which doesn't support multi-tenancy or cloud deployment.
can be purchased on-demand(Hourly).
can be purchased as a Reservation for up to 70% off the on-demand price.
pay for full physical host, irrespective of number of instances running 
suitable when you want to use hardware-bound license


EC2 Instance type

Family	Speciality 			Use Case
D2	Dense Storage			Fileservers/Data Warehousing/Hadoop
R4	Memory Optimized		Memory Intensive Apps/DBs
M4	General Purpose			Application Servers
C4	Compute Optimized		CPU Intensive Apps/DBs
G2	Graphics Intensive		Video Encoding/ 3D Application Streaming 
I2	High Speed Storage		NOSQL DBs, Data Warehousing etc
F1	Field Programmable Gate Array	Hardware acceleration for your code
T2	Lowest Cost, General Purpose	Web Servers/Small DBs
P2	Graphics/General Purpose GPU	Machine Learning, Bit Coin Mining etc
X1	Memory Optimized		SAP HANA/Apache Spark etc 

................

what is EBS? - block level storage, 		S3 - object level storage
EBS is block level storage.
Amazon EBS allows you to create storage volumes and attach them to Amazon EC2 instances.
Once attached, you can create a file system on top of these volumes, run a database, or use them in any other way you would use a block device.
Amazon EBS volumes are placed in a specific Availability Zones, where they are automatically relicated to protect you from the failure of a single component.
Elastic Volumes is a feature of amazon EBS that allows you to dynamically increase capacity.

EBS Volume Types
General purpose SSD (gp2)
Provisioned IOPS SSD (io1)
Throughput Optimized HDD (st1)
Cold HDD (sc1)
Magnetic Standard

EBS Volume Categories
Amazon EBS provides a range of options that allow you to optimize storage performance and cost for your workload. These options are divided into two major categories:

SSD-backed Volumes (IOPS-intensive) - we can boot from that  - 2 types - (gp2),(io1)
SSD-backed storage for transactional workloads, such as databases and boot volumes (performance depends primarily on IOPS)

HDD-backed Volumes (MB/s-intensive) - we cant boot from that - 3 types - (st1),(sc1), Magnetic Standard(we can boot on magnetic) 
HDD-backed storage for throughput intensive workloads, such as Map Reduce and log processing (performance depends primarily MB/s).

gp2 - upto 10000 IOPS
gp2 is default EBS volume type for the Amazon EC2 instances.
gp2 Volumes are backed by solid-state drives(SSDs)
General purpose, balances both price and performance.
Ratio of 3 IOPS per GB with up to 10,000 IOPS
Boot volume, low latency interactive apps, Dev and test
Volume size : 1 GB-16 TB
Max IOPS/Volume: 10,000
Price: $0.10/GB-month

Provisioned IOPS SSD (io1) - upto 32000 IOPS - both IOPS-intensive and throughput-intensive
These volumes are ideal for both IOPS-intensive and throughput-intensive workloads that require extremely low latency.
Designed for I/O intensive applications such as large relational or NoSQL databases.
Use if you need more than 10000 IOPS.
Can provision up to 32000 IOPS per volume
Volume size: 4GB - 16 TB
Price: $0.125/GB-month 

Throughput Optimized HDD(st1) - Throughput intensive - 
st1 is backed by hard disk drives (HDDS) and is ideal for frequently accessed, throughput intensive workloads with large datasets
st1 volumes deliver performance in term of throughput, measured in MB/s
Big data
Data warehouses
Log processing
Cannot be a boot volume
Can provision up to 500 IOPS per volume
Volume size : 500 GB - 16 TB
Price : $ 0.045/GB-month

Cold HDD(sc1)
sc1 is also backed by hard disk drives (HDDs) and provides the lowest cost per GB of all EBS volume types
Lowest cost storage for infrequent accessed workloads
file server
cannot be a boot volume
volume size : 500 GB - 16TB
Price : $0.025/GB-month

Megnetic (Standard)
Lowest cost per gigabyte of all EBS volume types that is bootable.
Magnetic volumes are ideal for workloads where data is accessed infrequently, and applications where the lowest storage cost is important.

Useful links:
https://aws.amzon.com/ebs/details/
https://doc.aws.amzon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/EBSVolumeTypes.html

.........

Launch EC2 instance
Choose AMI - Choose Instance type - Configure Instance - Add Storage -  Add Tags - Configure Security Group - Review
My AMI - after setup one AMI and all enviorment and configuration you can save as AMI
AWS Marketplace - find and run s/w in AWS Cloud
Community AMIs
Operating system

Security Group
A security group acts as a virtual firewall that controls the traffic for one or more instances.
When you launch an instance, you associate one or more security groups with the instance.
You can add rules to each security group that allow traffic to or from its associated instances.
You can modify the rules for a security group at any time, the new rules are automatically applied to all instances that are associated with the security group

EC2 Volumes
Choose another region and check either your EC2 instance is accessiable or not
How to increase Volume Size
How to attache volume to existing EC2 instance
How to detach volume
If you increased size of any drive you cant decrease it further, 
if you increased size of any drive you cant increase it further for next 6 hours
Your EC2 volume must be in same availability zone, in which you have your EC2 instance


...........................
Backup & restore EC2 instance
How to backup & restore EC2 instance
Backups are saved in form of AMI's
Backup AMI's can be copied from one region to another region


EBS Snapshots
A point-in-time snapshot of an EBS volume, can be used as a baseline for new volumes or for data backup.
If you make periodic snapshots of a volume, the snapshots are incremental only the blocks on the device that have changed after your last snapshot are saved in the new snapshot.
Even through snapshots are saved incrementally, the snapshot deletion process is designed so that you need to retain only the most recent snapshot in order to restore the entire volume.
snapshots occur asynchronously; the point-in-time snapshot is created immediately, but the status of the snapshot is pending until the snapshot is complete (when all of modified blocks have been transferred to Amazon S3), which can several hours for large initial snapshots or subsequent snapshots where many blocks have changed.

Although you can take snapshot of a volume while a previous snapshot of that volume is in the pending status, having multiple pending snapshots of a  volume may result in reduced volume performance until the snapshots complete.
There is a limit of five pending snapshots for a single gp2, io1, or Magnetic volume, and one pending snapshot for a single st1 or sc1 volume.
If you receive a Concurrent Snapshot Limit Exceeded error while trying to create multiple concurrent snapshot of the same volume, wait for one or more of the pending snapshots to complete before creating another snapshot of that volume.
Snapshots that are taken from encrypted volumes are automatically encrypted, Volumes that are created encrypted snapshots are also automattically encrypted.

.................
EC2 Instance Linux
You need putty and puttygen to access your linux servers
For Amazon linux, the user name is ec2
For Centos, the user name is centos.
For Debian, the user name is admin or root.
For Fedora, the user name is ec2-user.
For RHEL, the user name is ec2-user or root.
For SUSE, the user name is ec2-user or root.
For Ubuntu, the user name is ubuntu or root.


Elastic IP address
An Elastic IP address is a public IPv4 address, which is reachable from the internet. If your instance does not have a public IPv4 address, you can associate an Elastic IP address with your instance to enable communication with the internet; for example, to connect to your instance from your local computer.

AWS currently do not support Elastic IP addresses for IPv6.
To use an Elastic IP address, you first allocate one to your account, and then associate it with your instance or a network interface.
When you associate an Elastic IP address with an instance or its primary network interface, the instance's public IPv4 address (if it had one) is released back into Amazon's pool of public IPv4 address. You cannot refuse a public IPv4 address.

Elasic IP address
You can disassociate an Elastic IP address from a resource, and reasssociate it with a different resource.
A disassociated Elastic IP address remains allocated to your account until you explicitly release it.
To ensure efficient use of Elastic IP address, we impose a small hourly charge if an Elastic IP address is not associated with a running instance, or if it Elastic IP addresss is not associated with a stopped instance or an unattached network interface. while your instance is running, you are not charged for one Elastic for any additional Elastic IP addresses associated with the instance.

AN Elastic IP address is for use in a specific region only.
When you associate an Elastic IP address with an instance that previously had a IPv4 address, the public DNS hostname of the instance changes to match the Elastic IP address.

........
VPC 

A vpc is virtual private cloud is a virtual network that closely resembles a traditional network that you operate in your own data center, with the benifits of using the scalable infrastucture of Amazon Web Services (AWS).
A virtual private cloud is a virtual network dedicated to your AWS account.
It is logically isolated from other virtual networks in the AWS cloud.
You can launch your AWS resources, such as Amazon EC2 instances, into your VPC.
You can configure your VPC by modifying its IP address range, create subnets, and configure route tables, network getways, and security settings.

When you create a VPC, you must specify a range of IPv4 addresses, for the VPC in the form of a Classless InterDomain Routing (CIDR) block; for example, 10.0.0.0/16. This is the primary CIDR block for your VPC.

VPC CONFIGURATION
There are four types of VPC Configuration.
VPC with a Single Public Subnet
VPC with Public and Private Subnets
VPC with Public and Private Subnets and Hardware VPN Access
VPC with a Private Subnet Only and Hardware VPN Access

VPC with a Single public subnet
Your instances run in a private, isolated section of the AWS cloud with direct access to the Internet. Network access control lists and security groups can be used to provide strict control over inbound and outbound network traffic to your instances.

Creates:
A /16 network with a /24 subnet. Public subnet instances use Elastic IPs or Public IPs to access the Internet   

VPC with Public and private Subnets
In addition to containing a public subnets, this configuration adds a private subnets whose instances are not addressable from the internet. Instances in the private subnets can establish outbound connections to the Internet via the public subnet using Network Address Translation (NAT).

Creates:
A/16 network with two /24 subnets. Public subnets instances use Elastic IPs to access the Internet. Private subnets instances access the Internet via Network Address Translation (NAT). (Hourly charge for NAT devices apply.)

VPC with Public and Private Subnets and Hardware VPN Access 
This configuration adds an IPSec Virtual Private Network (VPN) connection between your Amazon VPC and your data center - effectively extending your data center to the cloud while also providing direct access to the Internet for public subnet instances in your Amazon VPC.

Creates:
A/16 network with two /24 subnets.
One subnet is directly connected to the Internet while the other subnet is connected to your corporate network via IPSec VPN tunnel.(VPN charge apply.)

VPC with a Private Subnets only and Hardware VPN Access
Your instances run in a private, isolated section of the AWS cloud with a private subnet whose instances are not addressable from the Internet. You can connect this private subnets to your corporate data center via an IPsec Virtual Private Network(VPN) tunnel.

Creates:
A/16 network with a /24 subnet and provisions an IPsec VPN tunnel between your Amazon VPC and your corporate network. (VPN charges apply).

VPC
Subnets
Route Tables
Internet Gateways
DHCP Option sets
Elatic IPs
Endpoints
NAT Gateways
Peering Connections
Virtual Private Gateways
Customer Gateways

Subnets 
A subnet is a range of IP address in your VPC. You can lanuch AWS resources into a specified subnet. Use a public subnet for resources that must be connected to the internet, and a private subnet for resources that won't be connected to the internet.

Public Subnet: If a subnet's traffic is routed to an internet to an internet gateway, the subnet is known as a public subset. If you want your instance in a public subset to communicate with the internet over IPv4, it must have a public IPv4 address or an Elastic IP address(IPv4).

Private Subnet: If a subnet doesn't have a route to the internet gateway, the subnet is known as a private subnet.

When you create a VPC, you must specify an IPV4 CIDR block for the VPC, The allowed block size is between a/16 netmask (65,536 IP addresses) and /28 netmask (16 IP addresses).

The first four IP addresses and the IP addresses and last IP address in each subnet CIDR block are not available for you to use, and cannot be assigned to an instance. For example, in a subnet with CIDR block 10.0.0.0/24, the following five IP addresses are reserved:

10.0.0.0: Network address.
10.0.0.1: Reserved by AWS for the VPC router.
10.0.0.2: Reserved by AWS. The IP address of the DNS server
10.0.0.3: Reserved by AWS for future use.
10.0.0.255: Network broadcast address, AWS do not support broadcast in a VPC, therefore AWS reserve this address.

Route Table
A route table contains a set of rules, called routes, that are used to determine where network traffic is directed.
Each subnet in your VPC must be associated with a route table.
The table controls the routing for the subnets.
A subnet can only be associated with one route table at a time.	but you can associated multiple subnets with the same route table.
Your can create additional custom route tables for your VPC.
Each subnets must be associated with a route table, which controls the routing for the subnets. If you don't explicitly associated a subnet with a particular route table, the subnet is implicitly associated with the main route table.

Route Table
You cannot delete the main route table, but you can replace the main route table with a custom table that you've created(so that this table is the default table each new subnet is associated with).

Internet Gateways
An internet gateways is a virtual router that connects a VPC to the internet.
Default VPC is already attached with an Internet gateway.
If you create a new VPC then you must attach the Internet gateway in order to access the internet.
Ensure that subnet's route table points to the Internet gateway


...............
Important point to discuss
Billing Dashboard
Receive Free Tier Usage Alerts
Just terminate everything from your Region after getting practiced
Make sure the selection of your Region in which you working
Amazon VPC Pricing (https://aws.amazon.com/vpc/pricing)

NAT GATEWAYS
You can use a network address translation (NAT) gateway to enable instances in a private subnet to connect to the internet or other AWS services, but prevant the internet from initiating a connection with those instances.
If you want EC2 instances in a private subnet of a virtual private cloud(VPC) to communicate securely over the Internet for things like s/w updates and package downloads.
You are charged for creating and using a NAT gateway in your account, NAT gateway hourly usage and data processing rates apply. Amazon EC2 charges for data transfer also apply.
To create a NAT gateway, you must specify the public subnet in which the NAT gateway should reside.
You must also specify an Elastic IP address to associate with the NAT gateway when you create it.
No need to assign public IP address IP address to your private instance.

After you've created NAT gateway, you must update the route table associated with one or more of your private subnets to point Internet-bound traffic to the NAT gateway. This enables instances in your private subnets to communicate with the internet.
You have a limit on the number of NAT gateways you can create in an Availablity Zone.
If you no longer need a NAT gateway, you can delete it. Deleting a NAT gateway disassociates its Elastic IP address, but does not release the address from your account.
http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonVPC/latest/UserGuide/VPC_Appendix_Limits.html

Architecture of a VPC with NAT Gateway

Testing Gateway	
You can ping website from a private Instance
You can tracert route to internet
You can check instance is accessiable from outside or not

Reminder:
Have to show total subnets Ips
Have to change instance password and then relogin via new password   

...............................................

VPC peering
(Amazon VPC) enables you to launch Amazon Web services (AWS) resources into a virtual network that your've defined.
A VPC peering connection is a networking connection between two VPCs that enables you to route traffic between them using private IPv4 addresses or IPv6 addresses.
Instances in either VPC can communicate with each other as if they are within the same network.
You can create a VPC peering connection between your own VPCs, or with a VPC in another AWS account. The VPCs can be in different regions (also known as an inter-region VPC peering connection).

A VPC peering connection help you to facilitate the transfer of data.
For example, if you have more than one AWS account, you can peer the VPCs those accounts to create a file sharing network.
You can also use a VPC peering connection to allow other VPCs to access resources you have in one of your VPCs.

VPC Peering Basics
The owner of the requster VPC sends a request to the owner of the accepter VPC to create the VPC peering connection. The accepter VPC can be owned by you, or another AWS account, and cannot have a CIDR block that overlaps with the requester VPC's CIDR block.
To enable the flow of traffic between the VPCs using private IP addresses, the owner of each VPC in the VPC peering connection must manually add a more of their VPC route tables that points to the IP address range of the other VPC (the Peer VPC).

If required, Update the security group rules that are associated with your instance to ensure that traffic to and from the peer VPC is not restricted.

Multiple VPC Peering Connections
A VPC peering connections helps you to facilitate the transfer of data.
For example, if you have more than one AWS account, you can peer the VPCs across those accounts to create a file sharing network.
You can also use a VPC peering connection to allow other VPCs to access resources you have in one of your VPCs.

Invalid VPC Peering Connection Configurations
Overlapping CIDR Blocks
Transitive Peering
Edge to Edge Routing Through an Internet Gateway
Edge to Edge Routing Through Private Connection

.............................
Network ACLs
A network access control list (ACL) is an optional layer of security for your VPC that acts as a firewall for controlling traffic in and out of one or more subnets.
Your VPC automattically comes with a modifiable default network ACL. By default, it allow all inbound and outbound IPv4 traffic and, if applicable, IPv6 traffic.
You can create a custom network ACL and associate it with a subnet. By default, each custom network ACL denies all inbound and outbound traffic until you add rules.
Each subnet in your VPC must be associated with a network ACL. If you don't explicitly associate a subnet with a network ACL, the subnet is automatically associated with the default network ACL.

You can associate a network ACL with multiple subnets; however, a subnet can be associated with only one network ACL at a time. When you associate a network ACL with a subnet, the previous association is removed.
A network ACL contains a numbered list of rules that we evaluate in order, starting with the lowest numbered rule, to determine whether ACL. The highest number that you can use for rule is 32766. We recommend that you start by creating rules with rule numbers that are multiples of 100, so that you can insert new rules where you need to later on.
A network ACL has separate inbound and outbound rules, and each rule can either allow or deny traffic.
Network ACLs are stateless; responses to allowed inbound traffic are subject to the rules for outbound traffic (and vice versa).

..................
VPN Connections

AWS Managed VPN Connections
By default, instances that you launch into an Amazon VPN can't communicate with your own(remote) network.
You can enable access to your remote network from your VPC by attaching a virtual private gateway to the VPC, creating a custom route table, updating your security group rules, and creating an AWS managed VPN connections.

AWS supports Internet Protocol security (IPsec) VPN connections.

Pricing:
https://aws.amazon.com/vpn/pricing

Components of VPN
Virtual Private Gateway:
A virtual private gateway is the VPN concentrator on the Amazon side of the VPN connection. You create a virtual private gateway and attach it to the VPC from which you want to create the VPN connection.

Customer Gateway:
A customer gateway is a physical device or software application on your side of the VPN connection.
To create a VPN connection, you must create a customer gateway resource in AWS, which provides information to AWS about your customer gateway device.

......................................

Elastic Load Balancer

Elastic load balancing supports three types of load balancers:
Application load balancer
Network Load balancer
Classic Load balancer

Network Load Balancer
Load Balancer distributes the web traffic to the available server.
A load balancer serves as the single point of contact for clients.
The load balancer distributes incoming traffic across multiple targets, such as Amazon EC2 instances.
This increases the availablity of your application.
You can add one or more listeners to your Load balancer.
A listener checks for connection requests from clients, using the protocol and port you configure and forward requests to a target group.
Each target group routes requests to one or more registered targets, such as EC2 instances using the TCP protocol and port number you specify.
Best practice is to place your servers in different Availablity zones

Network Load Balancer
A network load balancer functions at the fourth layer of the Open System Interconnection(OSI) model. It can handle millions of requests per second. After the load balancer receives a connection request, it selects a target from the target group for the default rule. It attemps to open a TCP connection to the selected target on the port specified in the listener configuration.

Pricing : https://aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/pricing/

Open port 80 in ACL or security group

..................................................

Auto Scaling 
AWS auto scaling monitors your applications and automatically adjusts capacity to maintain steady, predictable performance at the lowest possible cost.
You can use auto scaling to manage Amazon EC2 capacity automatically, maintain the right number of instances for your application, operate a healthy group of instances, and scale it according to your needs.

.................................
S3 (Simple Storage Service)

S3 provides Developer and IT team with secure, durable, highly-scalable object service.
Amazon S3 is easy to use, with a simple web service interface to store and retrieve any amount of data from anywhere on the web.
S3 is a safe place to store your files.
It is object based storage (Allows you to upload files)
Data is automatically distributed across a minimum of three physical facilities that are geographically separated within an AWS Region, and Amazon S3 can also automatically replicate data to any other AWS Region.

S3
Files can be from 0 bytes to 5 TB.
There is an unlimited storage.
Files are storage in buckets.
You can't install an operating system on S3.
S3 is a universal namespace, that is, names be unique globally.
https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/MyBucketName 
https://aws.amazon.com/s3/faqs

Data consistency Model for S3
Read after write consistency for overwrite PUTS and DELETES (can take sometimes to propagate)

S3 is a simple key, value store
S3 is object. Objects consist of the following.
Key (This is simple the name of the object)
Value (This is simply the data and is made up of sequence of bytes)
Version ID (Important for versioning)
Metadata (the data about you are storing)
Access control lists(Object level, bucket level)  

S3 
Build for 99.99% availability for the S3 platform.
Amazon Guarantee 99.9% availibility.
Amazon guarantee 99.9% durability for S3 information.
(Remember 11 x 9's) 
Tiered storage available
Lifecycle Management
Versioning 
Encryption
Secure your data using Access Control Lists and Bucket Policies

S3 Storage Tiers
S3 - Standard
S3 - IA (Infrequently Accessed)	For data that is accessed less frequently, but requires access when needed. Lower fee than S3, but you are charged a retrieval fee.
Reduced Redundancy Storage - Designed to provide 99.99% durability and 99.99% availability of objects over a given year.
Glacier - Very cheap, but used for archival only. It takes 3 - 5 hours to restore from Glacier.

Glacier 
Glacier is an extremely low-cost storage service for data archival. Amazon Glacier stores data for as little as $0.01 per gigabyte per month and is optimized for data that is infrequently accessed and for which retrieval times of 3 - 5 hours are suitable.

S3 Charges
Charged for
Storage
Requests
Storage Management pricing (Tagging)
Data transfer pricing
Moving data into S3 is free
https://aws.amazon.com/s3/pricing/
Have to show you s3 Requests and puts in billing 

S3
Buckets are a universal namespace
S3,S3 - IA,S3 Reduced Redundancy Storage
Encryption
Client side Encryption
Server side Encryption
Server side Encryption with Amazon S3 managed Keys (SSE-S3)
Server side Encryption with KMS (SSE-KMS)
Server side encryption with customer provided keys (SSE-C)
Control access to buckets using either a bucket ACL or using bucket policies 
By default, Buckets are Private and all objects stored inside them are private


S3 Versioning
Versioning is a means of keeping multiple variants of an object in the same buckets.
You can use versioning to preserver, retrieve and restore every version of every object in your Amazon S3 Bucket.
Stores all versions of an object(including all writes and even if you delete an object)
Great backup tool
Once enabled, versioning can't be disabled, only suspended.
Integrates with Lifecycle rules
Versioning's MFA Delete capability, which uses multi-factor authentication, can be used to provide an extra layer of security

.......................................

Snowballs
Import/Export disk
AWS import/export disk accelerates moving large amounts of data into and out of AWS cloud using portable storage devices for transport.
AWS Import/export disk transfers your data directly onto and off of Storage devices using Amazon's high-speed internal network and bypassing the internet.
Difficult for AWS to manage

Snowball
AWS Snowball is a service that accelerates transfering larger amounts of data into and out of AWS physical storage appliances, bypassing the internet.

Type of Snowball
Snowball 
Snowball Edge
Snowmobile

Pricing : https://aws.amazon.com/snowball/pricing

Snowball
Snowball cam import to S3 or export from S3
Snowball is petabyte-scale data transport solution that uses secure appliances to transfer large amounts of data into and out of AWS.
Using snowball addresses common challenges with large-scale data transfers including high speed network costs, long transfer times and security concerns.
Transferring data with snowball is easy, simple, fast, secure and can be as little as one-fifth the cost of high-speed internet
Snowball uses multiple layers of security designed to protect your data including tamper-resistant enclosures, 256-bit encryption and an industry standard trusted platform Module (TPM) designed to ensure both security and full chain-of-custody of your data.
Once the data transferred job has been processed and verified, AWS performs a s/w erasure of the snowball appliance.
Snowball to S3 and then to Glacier

Snowball Edge
AWS Snowball Edge is a 100TB data transfer device with on-board storage and compute capabilites.
You can use snowball edge to move large local datasets, or to support local workloads in remote or offline locations.
Snowball Edge connects to your existing applications and infrastructure using standard storage interfaces, streamlining the data transfer process and minimizing setup and integration.
Snowball Edge can cluster together to form a local storage tier and process your data on-premises, helping ensure your applications continue to run even when they are not able to access the cloud.

Snowmobile
AWS Snowmobile is an Exabytes-scales data transfer service used to move extremely large amounts of data to AWS.
You can transfer up to 100PB per snowmobile, a 45 foot long shipping container, pulled by a semi-trailer truck.
Snowmobile makes it easy to move massive volumes of data to the cloud, including video libraries, image repositories or a complete datacenter migration.
Transferring data with snowmobile is secure, fast and cost effective.

.....................

S3- Cross Region Replication

Cross Region Replication
Versioning must be enabled on both the source and destination buckets.
Files in an existing bucket are not replicated automatically. All subsequent replicate to multiple buckets or use daisy chaining (at this time).
Delete markets are replicated.
Deleting individual versions or delete markets will not be replicated.

* Objects might still be publicly accessible due to object ACLs

Cross Region Replication
You can copy data from 1 bucket to another via AWS CLI
aws s3 cp-recursive s3://sourcebucket s3://destination bucket

...............................................

S3 Lifecycle Management
Can be used in conjunction with versioning.
Can be applied to current versions and previous versions
Following actions can now be done.
Transition to the standard - Infrequent Access Storage Class (128 KB and days after the creation date)
Archive to the glacier Storage Class (30 days after IA)

CloudFront
Amazon CloudFront is a web service that speeds up distribution of your static and dynamic web content, for example, .html, .css, .php, image, and media
files, to end users.
CloudFront delivers your content through a worldwide network of edge locations.
When an end user requests content that you're serving with CloudFront, the user is routed to the edge location that provides the lowest latency, so content is delivered with the best possible performance.
If the content is already in that edge location, cloudFront delivers it immediately. if the content is not currently in that edge location, CloudFront retrieves it from an Amazon S3 bucket or an HTTP server (for example, a web server) that you have identified as the source for the definitive version of your content.

What is a CDN
A Content Delivery Network(cdn) is a system of distributed servers(Network) that deliver webpages and other web content to a user based on the geographical locations of the user, the origion of the webpage and a content delivery server.

CloudFront - Key Terminology 

Edge Location - This is the location where the content will be cached. This is separate to AWS Region/Availability Zone. There are total 50 Edge locations now.

Origin - This is the origin of all the files that the CDN will distribute, This can be either S3 bucket, EC2 instance, an Elastic Load Balancer or Route53,

Distribution - This is the name given the CDN which consists of collection of Edge Locations.

CloudFront
Amazon CloudFront can be used to deliver your entire website, including dynamic, static, streaming and interactive content using a global network of edge locations.
Requests for your content are automatically routed to the nearest edge locations, so the content is delivered with the best possible performance.

Delivery Methods for content
Web
speed up distribution of static and dynamic content
Distribute media files using HTTP or HTTPS.
Add, update, or delete objects, and submit data from web forms.
You store your files in an origion - either an Amazon S3 bucket or a web server. After you create the distribution, you can add more origins to the distribution.

RTMP
Create an RTMP distribution to speed up distribution of your streaming media files using Adobe Flash Media Server's RTMP protocol. An RTMP distribution allows an end user to begin playing a media file before the file has finished downloading from a CloudFront edge location.

CloudFront
Edge locations are not just read-only, you can write to them too. ( i:e put an object to them as well)
Objects are cached for the life of TTL (Time to Live)

AWS Free Usage Tier
As part of the AWS Free Usage Tier, you can get started with Amazon CloudFront for free. Upon sign-up, new AWS customers receive 50GB Data Transfer Out Transfer Out and 2,000,000 HTTP and HTTPS Requests each month for one year.

Pricing: https://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/pricing/

Edge Locations: https://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/details/

.....................
Storage Gateway

AWS Storage Gateway is a service that connects an on-premises s/w appliance with cloud-based to provide seamless and secure integration between an organization's on-premises IT environment and AWS's Storage infrastructure. The service enables you to securely store data to the AWS cloud for scalable and cost-effective storage.

AWS Storage Gateway's s/w appliance is available for download as a virtual machine (VM) image that you install on a host in your datacenter.

Storage gateway supports either VMware ESXi or Microsoft Hyper-V. Once you have installed your gateway assoicated with your AWS account through the activation process, you can use the AWS management console to create the storage gateway option that is right for you.

Types of Storage Gateway
File Gateway (NFS)
Volumes Gateway (iSCSI)
- Stored Volumes
- Cached Volumes
Taped Gateway (VTL)

File Gateway 
Files are stored as object in S3 Buckets, accessed through a Network File System (NFS) mount point. Ownership, permissions and timestamps are durably stored in S3 in the user-metadata of the object associated with the file. Once objects are transferred to S3 they can be managed as native S3 objects, and bucket policies such as versioning, lifecycle management and cross region replication apply directly to objects stored in bucket.

Volume Gateway
A volume gateway provides cloud-backed storage volumes that you can mount as Internet Small Computer System Interface (iSCSI) devices from your on-premises application servers. The gateway supports the following volume configurations:

Cached volumes - You store your data in Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) and retain a copy of frequently accessed data subsets locally. Cached volumes offer a substantial cost savings on primary storage and minimize the need to scale your storage on-premises. You also retain lowlatency access to your frequently accessed data.

Stored volumes - If you need low-latency access to your entire dataset, first configure your on-premises gateway to store all your data locally. Then asynchronously back up point-in-time snapshots of this data to Amazon S3. This configuration provides durable and inexpensive offsite backups that you can recover to your local center or Amazon EC2. For example, if you need replacement capacity for disaster recovery, you can recover the backups to Amazon EC2.

Tape Gateways
With a type gateway, you can cost-effectively and durably archive backup data in Amazon Glacier. A tape gateway provides a virtual tape infrastructure that scales seamlessly with your business needs and eliminates the operational burden of provisioning, scaling, and maintaining a physical tape infrastructure.
You can run AWS Storage Gateway either on-premises as a VM appliance, or in AWS as an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) Instance. You deploy your Gateways hosted on EC2 instances can be used for disaster recovery, data mirroring, and providing storage for applications hosted on Amazon EC2.

Summary 

File Gateway - For flat files, stored directly on S3.
Tape Gateway - Used for backup and uses popular backup applications like NetBackup, Backup Exec, Veeam etc.
Volume Gateway:
- Stored Volumes - Entire Dataset is stored on site and is asynchronously backed up to S3.
- Cached Volumes - Entire Dataset is stored on S3 and the most frequently accessed data is cached on site.


..................
IAM - Identity & Access Management

AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) is a web service that helps you securely control access to AWS resources. You use IAM to control who is authenticated (signed in) and authorized (has permissions) to use resources.
When you first create an AWS account, you begin with a single sign-in identity that has complete access to all AWS services and resources in the account. This identity is called that AWS account root user and is accessed by signing in with the email address and password that you used to create the account.
AWS strongly recommend that you do not use the root user for your everyday tasks, even the administrative ones.


......................................

CloudWatch 
Amazon CloudWatch provides a reliable, scalable, and flexible monitoring solution that you can start using within minutes. You no longer need to set up, manage, and scale your own monitoring systems and infrastructure. 

Use CloudWatch to monitor your AWS resources and the applications you run on AWS in real time.

Use CloudWatch Events to send system events from AWS resources to AWS Lambda functions, Amazon SNS topics, stream in Amazon Kinesis, and other target types.

Use CloudWatch Logs to monitors, store, and access your log files from Amazon EC2 instances, AWS CloudTrail, or other sources.

Feature & Benfits
Monitor Amazon EC2
Monitor Other AWS Resources
Monitor Custom Metrics
Monitor and store Logs
Set Alarms
View Graphs and Statistis


What we can do with CloudWatch 
Dashboards - Create awesome dashboards to see what is happening with your AWS environment.
Alarms - Allows you to set Alarms that notify you when particular thresholds are hit.
Events - CloudWatch Events helps you to respond to state changes in your AWS resources.
Logs - CloudWatch Logs helps you to aggregate, monitor and store logs.
Billing Alarms - You can also setup billing alerts if required.
CloudWatch service is Region wise.


..........................

Route53
What is DNS
If you have used the internet, you have used the DNS. DNS is used to convert human friendly domain names (such as example.com) into an IP Address (such as 10.20.30.40)
DNS resolves name into IP Address.
IP Addresses are used by computers to identify each other on Network.

Top Level Domains
If we look at common domain names such as amazon.com, google.com, microsoft.com etc. you will notice a string of characters seperated by dots (Periods). The last word in a domain name represents the "top level domain". The second word in a domain name is known as second level domain name (this is optional though it depends on the domain name). .com .edu .pk .gov .gov.uk


..........................

Simple Notification Service
Amazon Simple Notification Service (SNS) is a web service that makes it easy to set up, operate and send notifications from the cloud. It provides  developers with a highly scalable, flexible and cost-effective capability to push messages from an application and immediately deliver them to subscribers or other applications.

SNS allows you to group multiple recipients using topics, A topic is an 'access point' for allowing recipients to dynamically subscribe for identical copies of the same notification.

One topic can support deliveries to multiple endpoint types.

When you publish once to a topic, SNS deliveries appropriately formatted copies of your message to each subscriber.

................................

video (VPN+Connections+ +Virtual+Private+Gateway +Customer+Gateway)

main VPC

VPC subnet public - AZ - a
VPC Subnet private - AZ - b

assume subnet other thing already created
Virtual Private Gateway 	

Vpn Private gateway
Customer Gateway
VPN connection

................................
video 22 (Network+Load+Balancer)

create 2 linux instance (target)
set up webpage on both instance

     ssh -i "UITARDPKey.pem" ec2-user@ec2-65-0-18-153.ap-south-1.compute.amazonaws.com  machine A

/var/www/html/mytecmint.com/index.html


..................................

Big VPC

VPC subnet public - AZ - a
VPC Subnet private - AZ - b

assume subnet other thing already created
Virtual Private Gateway 	

Vpn connection
Customer Gateway



https://techgeeknewslive.blogspot.com/2016/04/lifi-what-is-lifi-lifi-means-led-light.html


support@nonstopstep.awsapps.com
manjeet@nonstopstep.awsapps.com
rohit@nonstopstep.awsapps.com

...................................
create 1 instance, create RDS mysql, login in instance, download, rds client, and access RDS



EFS - elastic file system


.................................................
S3 event trigger

import boto3
from uuid import uuid4
def lambda_handler(event, context):
	s3 = boto3.client("s3")
	dynamodb = boto3.resource('dynamodb')
	for record in event['Records']:
		bucket_name = record['s3']['bucket']['name']
		object_key = record['s3']['object']['key']
		size = record['s3']['object'].get('size',-1)
		event_time = record ['eventName']
		dynamoTable = dynamodb.Table('uita-table')
		dynamoTable.put_item(
			Item={'RequestId': str(uuid4()), 'Bucket': bucket_name, 'Object':object_key,'Size':size, 'Event': event_name, 'EventTime':event_time})


cron job

import boto3
ec2 = boto3.resource('ec2')
def lambda_handler(event, context);
	filter = [
		{
			'Name': 'tag:Type',
			'Values':['Scheduled']
			
		}
		]
	instances = ec2.instances.filter(Filters=filter)
	for instance in instances:
		instance.start()
	return 'Check your EC2 instance status'


......................................

Cloud formation

EC2 instance

{
  "Resources": {
    "MyEc2Instance": {
      "Type": "AWS::EC2::Instance",
      "Properties": {
        "ImageId": "ami-089c6f2e3866f0f14"
      }
    }
  }
}


S3 resource

{
 "Resources": {
    "BucketName": {
      "Type": "AWS::S3::Bucket",
      "Properties": {
        "BucketName": "uitabucketid3847"
      }
    }
  }
}

VPC

{
  "AWSTemplateFormatVersion": "2010-09-09",
  "Resources": {
    "MyVPC1": {
      "Type": "AWS::EC2::VPC",
      "Properties": {
        "CidrBlock": "10.0.0.0/16"
      },
      "MyPrivateSubnet": {
        "Type": "AWS::EC2::Subnet",
        "Properties": {
          "VpcId": {
            "Ref": "MyVPC1"
          },
          "CidrBlock": "10.0.0.0/24"
        }
      },
      "MyEC2Instance": {
        "Type": "AWS::EC2::Instance",
        "Properties": {
          "ImageId": "ami-089c6f2e3866f0f14",
          "SubnetId": {
            "Ref": "MyPrivateSubnet"
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}


EC2 with options

{
  "AWSTemplateFormatVersion": "2010-09-09",
  "Parameters": {
    "InstanceTypeParameter": {
      "Type": "String",
      "Default": "t2.micro",
      "AllowedValues": [
        "t2.micro",
        "m1.small",
        "m1.large"
      ],
      "Description": "Enter t2.micro, m1.small, or m1.large. Default is t2.micro."
    }
  },
  "Resources": {
    "FirstEc2Instance": {
      "Type": "AWS::EC2::Instance",
      "Properties": {
        "InstanceType": {
          "Ref": "InstanceTypeParameter"
        },
        "ImageId": ""
      }
    }
  }
}

S3 Bucket	

{
  "Parameter": {
    "S3BucketName": {
      "Description": "Name of the S3 Bucket",
      "Type": "String",
      "ConstraintDescription": "S3BucketName must be between 3 and 63 characters in length.",
      "MinLength": 3,
      "MaxLength": 63
    }
  },
  "Resources": {
    "S3Bucket12": {
      "Type": "AWS::S3::Bucket",
      "Properties": {
        "BucketName": {
          "Ref": "S3BucketName"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

................................................................

{
	"AWSTemplateFormatVersion": "2010-09-09",
	"Mappings":{
	"RegionMap": {
	"us-east-1": 
}

.............................

add script before launching instance

before that create S3 role and create bucket and upload index.html page

#!/bin/bash
yum update -y
yum install httpd -y
service httpd start 
chkconfig httpd on
aws s3 cp s3://urduitbucket/index.html /var/www/html


.............................................................................

how to check Kernel Version of linux OS?
uname -a 	will print all info
uname -r	will print all kernal

How to check IP address of server?
ifconfig
ip a
hostname -I

How to check default gateway of server?
route -vn

What is ulimit?
ulimit		it will check limit how many file can open at time
lsof

How to check which RPM has created /etc/password file?
rpm -qf /etc/passwd  		show which rpm provides this file
setup-2.8.71-10.el7.noarch
rpm -ql setup-2.8.71-10.el7.noarch		it show files given by rpm

Disk space is still full even after deleting a file of 5GB?
lsof | grep deleted | wc -l

How to ssh to your server?
ssh -v root@localhost  -p 22

Sudo bash vs sudo su -
sudo bash 		it will remain in current working directory
su - 			it will go in root dirctory and current working dir also root

What is use of /home/user/.bash_profile?

How to create alias of a command
what is use of ~/.bashrc?
what is use of curl?
curl cmd show you if you host a local webserver that is working or not

what is use of wget?
download anything from remote side

what is file name to manage dns entires on linux?
vi /etc/resolv.conf
namserver 8.8.8.8

what is use of /etc/hosts entires?

what is use W command?
currently logged in user, and load of server

How to kill all process of any user?
ps fax | grep ping
ps faxu | grep aashu
pkill -u aashu

How to mount disk permanently?
fdisk -l 	to check disk
mkfs.ext4 /dev/xvdb
lsblk		it show you only that file system has been created
/etc/fstab	mount permanently or temp
mount 		temp mount

How to check hidden files and how to create it?
ls -la		hidden file

How to start process at start up time?
vim /etc/rc.local	make entry in this file, cmd
crontab -e		make entry in there

what does nameless dirctory represent?
ll -a || less 
.		my current working directory
..		my parent directory
cd /
ls -la		
.		my current
.. 		my previous working directory  

How do you check for free disk space?
df -Th		free disk space
df -ik		its show Inodes available and used


How do you check size of a directory or file on your system?
du -sh ./*

How do you check open port on linux servers? 
netstat -tunlp

How do you check CPU usage for a process?
top

How you deal with mounting partitions?
cat /proc/mount
findmnt

How to you/find use of a cmd you don't know?
whatis tee

How to check if ACL is set on a file.
getfacl /etc/fstab	to get ACL permission
setface /etc/fstab 	to set ACL permission

What cmd do you use to check attribute of a file?
how to check attribute 
lsattr /etc/fstab	to check attribute of file
chattr +i /etc/fstab    set attribute i immutable

What would happen if I remove execute permission from a directory?
chmod o-x lokendra/	if you try to access again same file you cant now
cd lokendra/		if you try to access dir you cant to do this

I am getting message (No Space Left on device) and df -Th show 50G free?
df -ik			inode get full

How to check if OS is running on virtual of physical machine?
dmidecode | grep -i vm


How to change owner and Group of a file?
chown tom:tom /tmp/.abc

What is use of NMAP cmd?
nmap 127.0.0.1		search open port
nmap -A 8.8.8.8


How to remove an INODE from linux File system?

...........................................................................

Q1 A user is not to ssh to a remote server, what could be the reason cause?
key file is wrong  permission key file is something else apart from 400
vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config		check ssh port in the file
also check route permission or particuler user permission is there or not?
DenyUser tom
AllowUser harry
PublicKeyAuthentication yes 	or not?
AutherizedKeysFile .ssh/authorized_keys		location of autherized key file
PasswordAuthentication No			if its allow or not?

/var/empty/sshd					permission of this folder must 711

Q2 User root has created a file (/tmp/abc) with 700 permission, you want that your lokendra should have full access to file, how will do this?
 setfacl -m u:manjeet:rwx /root/Downloads/mansan/mansan
getfacl /root/Downloads/mansan/mansan 

Q3 How will you change the default login shell for all upcoming users on Linux?
vi /etc/default/useradd			change SHELL to any shell /sbin/nologin and try to user add, it will come with that shell now


Q4 After creating password less ssh access, whenever I try to login to a server it asks me for the password, while I have verified that my public key is placed on a remote server?
check permission of the file and the run cmd
ssh-add		it will add key file for auth

Q5 How to disable root account?
sudo usermod -s /sbin/nologin root 	disable
sudo usermod -s /bin/bash root		enable

Q6 I have a server where httpd service is running, i want that httpd should be running on cpu core no 2 only. (CPUAffinity=2)
locate httpd.service
vi /usr/lib/systemd/system/httpd.service 	and specify cpu affinity 
[Service]
CPUAffinity=2					and save it

Q7 After reboot, I can see a time difference in /var/log/message and os time.
hwclock		hardward clock and system time need to be in sync  
date

Q8 I went to restart a service only if the service is already running. If service is in a stopped state the 
systemctl try-restart httpd.service		if service running the it restart otherwise do nothing

Q9 what is max filename length allowed in Linux?
255

Q10 what is drop cache in Linux and how do you clear it?
cat /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches

To free pagecache:  			#echo 1 > /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches
To free dentries and inodes,		#echo 2 > /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches
To feee pagecache, dentries and inodes 	#echo 3 > /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches


......................................................................................

USE method 	Utilization, Saturation and Errors
check Up time with uptime/top/w		

dmesg		- kernal buffer, check kernal logs, if any issue hardware/kernal level, -H
vmstat		- virtual memory stat

process ID 0 and is responsible for paging, and is actually part of the kernel rather than a normal user-mode process. 
Process ID 1 is usually the init process primarily responsible for starting and shutting down the system. Originally, process ID 1 was not specifically reserved for init by any technical measures
PID 0 
PID 1 for systemd

UID
UID 0 is reserved for the root.
UIDs 199 are reserved for other predefined accounts.
UID 100999 are reserved by system for administrative and system accounts/groups.
UID 100010000 are occupied by applications account.
UID 10000+ are used for user accounts.

GID
GID 0 is reserved for the root group
GID 199 are reserved for the system and application use.
GID 100+ allocated for the users group.

.......................................................
How will you change default user id value in linux?
vi /etc/login.dfs 
UID_MIN		1000
UID_MAX		60000

root# rm -rf /tmp/test gives operation not permitted. Reason?
chattr +i /tmp/test	it (chattr) allows a user to set certain attributes of a file, now it cant deleted

/etc/hosts (which RPM is responsible for creating this file).
rpm -qf /etc/hosts		to find about rpm of that file

what is difference b/w 	RPM and YUM?
rpm	redhat package manager
yum	yellow dog update modifier
both use to manage s/w in linux system, used in like centos redhat os
yum install the package or service with dependincies, 
rpm by default cant install with dependenciy
check rpm dependency 	rpm -qPR xxxx.rpm


what is difference b/w s/f and hard link?
hard link		inode value remain same, whatever hard link we create, ln cmd use
ll -i /tmp/test		to find inode value

soft link		inode value will change for soft link file, ln -s cmd use
ll -i /tmp/test		you will see pointing path to mail file


what is sticky bit?
if implement sticky bit, the owner and root can delete the file, and it is implement on a folder

how will you check open ports on linux server?
netstat -tulnp

how will you check open ports on remote servers (without login)
nmap -A 8.8.8.8

your site is throwing 500 error, how will you start troubleshooting?
need to identify error code, 500 data server issue, etc

how will you start troubleshooting if your site is down?


how will you create space on disk if it is showing 100% used?
df -h
will check du -sh * 		if all good might need to increase disk space

what is package of sar cmd and what does it do?
sysstat is package for sar
/etc/sysconfig/sysstat		here history, compressafter, SA_DIR=/var/log/sa, compression

if want to find out file created by rpm 
rpm -ql xxxx.rpm

...............................................................................................................

what is latest posgresql version?
13

select version();	

How to get first 'N' records in postgresql?
select * from call_history limit 5;
select * from call_history order by salary desc;

what is pgAdmin?
the interface GUI screen where you run query

How to change/alter data type of a column.
alter cmd we can change/add/removing/modifying data type the column of a table


What is table partitioning?
Data partitioning, like you partition data on the basis of data like india,aus,pak customer



Update and update

insert into server_preference_store (context_id,context_type,key,value) values ('184','contactCenter','request.encoding','xml');

update server_preference_store set key='request.encoding' where context_id='234';

how to find max salary from 2 tables

create database hra;

create table t1 (empid serial primary key, empname varchar(50) not null, salary varchar(255) not null);
create table t2 (salary varchar(255) not null, empname varchar(50) not null, empid serial primary key);

alter table t1 rename to tone;				rename table

alter table t1 add name varchar(50);			add a column in table

alter table t1 drop column name ;			remove a column from a table

alter table t1 rename COLUMN "empname" to  "name";	rename column 


write a query to find the 3rd-hightest salary from the t1 table.
select * from the t1 where order by desc limit 2,1;

write a query to find the Nth highest salary from the table without using TOP/limit keyword.
select salary from t1 where 2 =(select count(Distinct salary) from t2 where t2.salary > t1.salary);

write query to find duplicate rows in a table.
select *,count(empid) from t1 group by empid.
select *,count(salary) from t2 group by salary;

write a query to calculate the even and odd records from a table.
select * from t1 where mod(empid,2)=0;		even
select * from t1 where mod(empid,2)=1;		odd

write a query to find 1st and last record from the t1 table.
select * from t1 where empid = (select min(empid) from t1);	1st
select * from t1 where empid = (select max(empid) from t1);	last

How do you copy all rows of a table using sql query?
create table t1_copy as select * from t1;		copy full table
create table t1_copy as select empid,empname from t1;	only copy 2 column
create table t1_copy as select * from 3=4;		create blank table with column names

write a query to retrieve the list of employees working in the same department.
select distinct e.empid,e.name,e.salary from t1 e, t2 e1 where e.name=e1.empname and e.empid=e1.empid; 

write a query to retrieve the last 3 records from the t1 table.
select * from (select * from t1 order by empid desc limit 3) temp order by empid asc;

write a query to fetch details of employees whose name ends with an alphabet 'y' and contains five alphabets.
select * from t1 where name like '____y';



............................................................................................
git github

install git on 2 machine
yum install git

git config --global user.name "ajay"
git config --global user.email "ajayyadav19@gmail.com"
git config --list

which git
git --version


create git account on website
https://github.com

got to 1 machine
create direcotry 
mkdir mumgit
cd mumgit
git init


create got file
cat > mumbai1
git status					check status, check if code in working space or commited
git add .					add to staging
git commit -m "My First commit from mumbai"	commited, changed got saved, and versioning started
git status					now working are is empty
git 							it will show commit id
git show 8512df9c8bd				it will show commited id status

connect system git to github
git remote add origin https://github.com/manjeetyadav19/repo.git
git push origin master 							push code to github	


in another account add remote origin and then pull data
git pull origin master					pull data from repo


To ignore the file while commiting
vi .gitignore
*.css
*.java

git add .gitignore
git commit -m "latest update exclude .css"


To check branches 
git branch		to check branches
git branch man		to create branch
git checkout man	to switch branch
git log --oneline	will get all commits in one liner


To can't merge branch of diff repositories

We use pulling mechanism to merge branches
git merge man					to merge branch


Stashing
git stash			to put data in stash
git stash list			to see stashed items list
git stash apply stash@{3}
then you can add and commit

To clear the stash items
git stash clear			clear all stash file

Git reset
to reset staging area
git reset <filname>		reset only one file
git reset.			reset all file in staging area, remove all file from staging area

git reset --hard		it will remove the code/file from the workspace and staging both area.

git revert
git revert help you to undo existing commit
git revert <command-id>

how to delete untracked files
git clear -n			dry run
git clear -f			delete forcefully

Tags
git tag -a <tagname> -m <msg> <commit-ID>

To see
git tag

To see particular commit content by using tag
git show  <tag name>

To delete a tag
git tag -d <tagname>

cloning
git clone https://github.com/manjeetyadav19/repo.git		cloning from github to local system


..............................................................
chef - configuration managment tool
Pull based - chef
Push based - Ansible
IAC - Infrastruction as a code
lang - ruby

Architecture

workstation (cookbook(recipe)) --knife-- chef server --knife--  node 1, node2(ohai)(chef client)

bootstrap - chef server connect to the node, that process known as bootstrap
ohai - current configuration, or maintain current state info. of node 
chef client - Tool runs on every chef node to pull code from chef server (convergence)
knife - is a cmd line tool, that establish communication among workstation, server and node
Idempotency - tracking the state of system resources to ensure that the changes should not reapply Repeatedly.


How to install chef on workstation
www.chef.io  	download chef workstation 
now to linux machine copy url and do
weget  <url>
yum install chef...
which chef
check --version

cookbook
cookbook is collection of recipes and some other file and folders
checfignore - like .gitignore
kitchen yml - for testing cookbook
metadata.rb - name version author etc of the cookbook
readme.md - information about usage of cookbook

recipe - where you write code

mkdir cookbooks
cd cookbooks
chef generate cookbook test-cookbook

cd test-cookbook

chef generate recipe test-recipe.rb
to check use tree cmd

cd ..

vi test-cookbook/recipes/test-recipe.rb


create on recipe
file '/home/ec2-user/myfile' do
content 'welcome to nonstopstep'
action :create
end


chef spec ruby -c test-cookbook/recipes/test-recipe.rb		to check if code is ok

chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook::test-recipe]"		z meaning for local machine, r mean run list

2nd recipe
cd test-cookbook
chef generate recipe recipe2
cd ..
vi test-cookbook/recipes/recipe2.rb----------------------------------
package 'tree' do
action :install
end

file '/home/ec2-user/myfile2' do
content 'second Project code'
action :create
end
----------------------------------

chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook::recipe2]"
cat /myfile2
yum remove tree -y 
chef 

recipe 3 deploying an apache server

chef generate  cookbook apache-cookbook
cd apache-cookbook/
chef generate recipe apache-recipe
tree
cd ..
ls

vi apache-cookbook/recipes/apache-recipe.rb--------------------
package 'httpd' do
action :install
end

file '/var/www/html/index.html' do
content 'welcome to nostopstep'
action :create
end

service 'httpd' do
action [:enable, :start]
end
----------------------------------

chef exec ruby -c apache-cookbook/recipes/apache-recipe.rb
chef-client -zr "recipe[apache-cookbook::apache-recipe]"

Resource: it is the basic component of a recipe used to manage the infrastructure with diff kind of states there can be multiple resources in a recipe, which wil help in configuration and managing the infrastructure
eg
Package: tree, httpd 
Service: enable, disable, start, stop, status
user: manage the user, create user.
group: create group
templete: manage file with embadded ruby template
cookbook-file: transfers the file from the files subdirectory in the cookbook to a location on the node
file: manage the content of a file on the node.
execute: execute a cmd on the node
cron: edit an existing cron file on the node
directory: mangages the directory on the node 


type of attribute
default
force-default
normal
override
force-override
automatic

if written 2 code same to same, bt 1 is default and another 1 is force-default, so priority of force-default is higher

where we can define attri
Node 
cookbook
roles
enviroments
recipes

Login into amazon linux machine
sudo su 
ohai
ohai ipaddress
ohai memory/total
ohai cpu/0/mhz

recipe 3
cd apache-cookbook
chef generate recipe recipe3
cd ..
vi apache-cookbook/recipe/recipe3.rb----------------------------------
file '/home/ec2-user/basicinfo' do
content "This is to get attribute
HOSTNAME: #{node['hostname']}
IPADDRESS: #{node['ipaddress']}
CPU: #{node['cpu']['0']['mhz']}
MEMORY: #{node['memory']['total']}"
action :create
end
----------------------------------

How to execute linux cmd in b/w the recipe

vi test-cookbook/recipe/test-recipe1.rb----------------------------------
execute "run a script" do
command <<-EOH				
mkdir /home/ec2-user/manjeet
touch /home/ec2-user/manjeet/file1
EOH
end
----------------------------------
EOH means end of here of ruby script


vi test-cookbook/recipe/test-recipe2.rb----------------------------------
user "rajput" do
action :create
end
----------------------------------

vi test-cookbook/recipe/test-recipe3.rb----------------------------------
group "common" do
action :create
members 'rajput'
append true
end
----------------------------------
append true 	means add in previous one, dont overide

what is runlist?, run multiple cookbook recipe in one go
To run the recipes in a sequence order that we mention in a run list
with the process, we can run multiple recipies, but the condition is, there must be only one recipe from one cookbook

chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook::test-recipe],recipe[apache-cookbook::apache-recipe]"

How to include recipe
vi test-cookbook/recipes/default.rb----------------------------------
include_recipe "test-cookbook::test_recipe"
include_recipe "test-cookbook::recipe2"
----------------------------------

chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook::default]"

combine multiple default
chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook::default],recipe[apache-cookbook::default]"
OR
chef-client -zr "recipe[test-cookbook],recipe[apache-cookbook]"


.............................
chef server is going to be a mediator for the code or cookbook

workstation --chef server -- nodes
first create account on chef server
then attach your workstation to chef-server
Now upload your cookbook from workstation to chef- server
apply cookbooks from chef-server to node

search chef.io - create account
go to chef account - check on organisation - start kit - download starter kit
open the download content - unzip - chef- repo

cp chef-repo/
ls -a
cd chef/
ls
knife.rb
cat knife.rb
you will get url of chef server
 

scp -i "AWSSingaporeKey.pem" -rP 22 /root/Downloads/chef-repo/ ec2-user@ec2-18-139-222-22.ap-southeast-1.compute.amazonaws.com:/home/ec2-user

knife ssl check		to check if you are connected with chef server or not?

..........................
Bootstrap a Node - Attaching a node to the chef server
during bootstrap chef repo package will copy on nodes, and it will node will also connect to the chef server

How to connect a node the chef server
create nodes in same AZ 

Now go to workstation
knife bootstrap node_ip --ssh-user ec2-user --sudo -i node-key.pem -N node1	(node-key.pem in chef-repo folder)
knife bootstrap 172.31.29.224 --ssh-user ec2-user --sudo -i AWSSingaporeKey.pem -N node2
knife bootstrap 172.31.21.197 --ssh-user ec2-user --sudo -i AWSSingaporeKey.pem -N node1

knife node list 		to check connected node list 

then node will visible on chef UI server also

there is 2 cookbook 1 that created on root or home folder of user
 /home/ec2-user/cookbooks/apache-cookbook/
/home/ec2-user/chef-repo/cookbooks		and another 1 is in chef-repo folder that is downloaded from the chef server

copy folder from the home folder to chef-repo
pwd
/home/ec2-user/chef-repo/cookbooks
mv /home/ec2-user/cookbooks/apache-cookbook/ cookbooks/
mv /home/ec2-user/cookbooks/test-cookbook/ cookbooks/

rm -rf /home/ec2-user/cookbooks/		delete old 

.........................................................
Now We have to upload apache-cookbook
knife cookbook upload apache-cookbook

Now to check whether cookbook is uploaded apache-cookbook
knife cookbook list

Now we will attach the recipe, which we would like to run on node
knife node run_list set node1 "recipe[apache-cookbook::apache-recipe]"

knife node show node1					to check attached recipe
Runlist recipe[apache-cookbook::apache-recipe]

..................................................

Now take access of node1 with the help of ssh
go to chef-client
Now all files would be updated, go to browser, paste public ip of the node, you will get webpage

...........................................................
go to workstation again
vi cookbook/apache-cookbook/recipes/apache-recipe.rb
Now change some content &  
test 2 note added

go again on node1 and run
chef-client

...........................
now, we do not want to call chef-client everytime
we want to automate this process
go to node1

vi /etc/crontab
* * * * * root chef-client

now go to chef-workstation
make some changes
vi cookbook/apache-cookbook/recipes/apache-recipe.rb
test 3 note added

uplaoad on the chef-server
knife cookbook upload apache-cookbook

...............................................

Now create one more node node2
Advance details
#!/bin/bash
sudo su
yum update -y
echo "* * * * * root chef-client" >> /etc/crontab

Now go to workstation and run bootstrap cmd
Now attach cookbook to node run list
Now check in browser node2 shows webpage

.....................................................

To see list of cookbook which are present in chef-server
knife cookbook list

To delete cookbook from chef-server
Knife cookbook delete <cookbook name> -y

To see list of nodes which are present in chef server
knife node list

To delete nodes from chef-server
knife node delete <node name> -y

To see list of clients which are present in chef-server
knife client delete <client name> -y

To see list of roles which are present in chef-server
knife role list

To delete roles from chef-server
knife role delete <role name> -y


Roles------------------------
cd roles

vi devops.rb
name "devops"
description "Web server role"
run_list "recipe[apache-cookbook::apache-recipe]"

Now comeback to chef-repo
Now upload the role on chef-server
knife role from file roles/devops.rb

If you want to see the role created
knife roles list

Now create two instances as node1 & node2 is same AZ as of workstation
Now bootstrap the node

knife bootstrap <private-ip> --ssh-user ec2-user --sudo -i AWSSingaporeKey.pem -N node1
knife bootstrap <private-ip> --ssh-user ec2-user --sudo -i AWSSingaporeKey.pem -N node2
..................................................................

Now connects these nodes to role
knife role list
knife node run_list set node1 "role[devops]"
knife node run_list set node2 "role[devops]"

knife node show node1 / 2

knife cookbook upload apache-cookbook

Now check public-ip of any node in browser

cat cookbook/apache-cookbook/recipes/recipe1.rb

vi roles/devops.rb
name "devops"
description "web server role"
run_list "recipe[apache-cookbook::recipe1]"

knife role from file roles/devops.rb
Now, take access of any node via ssh & check

Now again go to workstation
vi roles/devops.rb
name "devops"
description "web server role"
run_list "recipe[apache-cookbook]"

knife role from file roles/devops.rb
knife cookbook upload apache-cookbook

vi roles devops.rb
name "devops"
description "web server role"
run_list "recipe[apache-cookbook]","recipe[test-cookbook]"

Now upload this role to server

knife role from file roles/devops.rb

knife cookbook upload test-cookbook

vi cookbook/test-cookbook/recipes/test-recipe6.rb
%w (httpd mariadb-server unzip git vim)
.each do |p|

package p do 
action :install
end
end

knife cookbook upload test-cookbook

Now go inside any node search git, if you will get git inside node, it means works properly

....................................................................

Docker 
docker id a adv. version of virtualisation


Docker Hub
	|
	|
container/OS
docker engine
    OS
   H/W


VM	VM
OS	OS
EXSI - Hyper
Physical H/W


Docker is an source centralised platform designed to create deploy and run applications.
Docker uses container on the host OS to run applications. It allows applications to use this same linux kernal as a system on the host computer, rather than creating a while virtual OS

We can install docker on only OS but docker engine runs natively on linux distribution 
Docker writtern in 'go' lang.
Docker is a tool that performs OS level virtualization, also known as containerization
Before docker many users faces that problem that a particular code is running in the developer's system but in the users system 
Docker 	is set of platform as a service that was OS level virtualization whereas VMware was H/W level virtualisation


Rapid Antigence test

CBC complete blood count
CPR C-reactive protein

RT-PCR test

Advantages of Docker
No Pre-allocation of RAM
CI Efficiency - docker enables you to build a container image and use that same image across every step of the deployment process 
less cost


Developer 
   |
   |
   |
Docker file ---Docker engine/daemon(image)----Docker Hub(Registry) 
			|
			|
		    container


Docker Daemon - 
Docker daemon runs on the host OS 
It is responsible for running containers to, manages docker services.
Docker Daemon can communicate with other daemons

Docker client
Docker users can interact with docker daemon through a client
Docker client uses commands and Rest API to communicate with the docker doemon
when a client runs any server cmd on the docker client terminal, the client terminal sends these docker cmd to the docker daemon
It is possible for docker client to communicate with more than one damon

Docker Host
Docker host is used to provide an envionment to execute and run applications. it contains the docker daemon. images, containers, networks and storage

Docker Hub/Registry
Public
Private

Docker Images
Docker images are the read only binary templetes used to create docker containers

OR

Single file with all dependencies and configuration required to run a program

Ways to create an images
1. Take Image from docker hub
2. create image from docker file.
3. create image from existing container

Docker container
contains hold the entire packages that is needed to run the application
Or

In other words, we can say that, the image is a template and the container is a copy of that template
Container is like a virtual machine
images becomes container when they run on docker engine.


..........................................
yum install docker -y

To see all images present in your local
docker images

To find out images in docker hub
docker search jenkins

To downloads image from dockerhub to local machine
docker pull jenkins

To give name to container
docker run -it --name bhupender ubuntu /bin/bash	run (create and start) -it (interactive mode / terminal)

To check, service is start or not 
service docker status

To start container
docker start bhupender

To go inside container
docker attach bhupender

To see all containers
docker ps -a

To see only running containers
docker ps

To stop container
docker stop bhupinder

To delete container
docker rm bhupinder


Whereas in docker exec command you can specify which shell you want to enter into. It will not take you to PID 1 of the container. It will create a new process for bash. docker exec -it < container-id > bash. Exiting out from the container will not stop the container.

.....................................
Create image from own container
docker run -it --name bhupicontainer centos /bin/bash
cd tmp/

Now create one file inside this tmp directory 
touch myfile

now if you want to see 	the difference b/w the base image & changes on it then
docker off bhupicontainer updateimage

C /root
A /root/.bash_history
C /tmp
A /tmp/myfile

Now create image of this container 
docker commit newcontainer updateimage

docker images
Now create container from this image
docker run -it --name rajcontainer updateimage /bin/bash

ls
cd /tmp
ls
myfile

...................................
creating image from dockerfile
dockerfile is basically a text file, it contains some set of instruction 
Automation of docker image creation

Docker components
FROM - 
For base image this cmd must be on top of the dockerfile.

RUN -
To execute cmd, it will create a layer in image.

MAINTAINER -
Author / Owner / Description

COPY - 
copy files from local system (docker vm), we need to provide route, destination, we cant download file from internet and only remote repo.

ADD - 
Similar to copy but, it provides files from internet, also we extract file at docker image side.

EXPOSE - 
To expose ports, such as port 8080 for tomcat, port 80 for nginx etc.

WORKDIR -
To set working directory for a container.

CMD
Execute cmd but during container creation

COPYPOINT - 
Similar to cmd, but has higher priority over cmd, 1st cmd will be executed by ENTRYPOINT Only.

ENV - 
Environment variables

..................................................
Dockerfile
1. create a file named dockerfile
2. add instruction in dockerfile
3. Build dockerfile to create image
4. Run image to create container 


vi Dockerfile-----------------------
FROM ubuntu
RUN echo "Technically giftgu" > /tmp/testfile
------------------------------------

To create image out of dockerfile
Docker build -t myimg
Docker ps -a
docker images

Now create container from the above image
docker run -it --name mycontainer myimg /bin/bash
cat /tmp/testfile

................................................
vi Dockerfile
FROM centos
WORKDIR /tmp
RUN echo "Welcome to nonstop step" > /tmp/testfile
ENV myname manjeetyadav
COPY testfile1 /tmp
ADD test.tar.gz /tmp

.................................
Volumne is simply a directory inside our container 
1stly, we have to declare the directory as a volume and then share volume 
Even if we stop container, still we can access volume
Volume will be created in one container 
You cant create volume from existing container 
You can share one volume across any number of containers 
Volume will not be installed when you update an image 
You can mapped volume in two ways 
Container - container 
Host - container 

Benifits of volume
Decouping container from storage 
Share volume among different container 
Attach volume to containers
On deleting container volume does not delete

..........................
Creating file from Dockerfile
create a Dockerfile and write
FROM centos
VOLUME ["/myvolume"]

Then create image from this dockerfile
docker build -t myimage .

Now create a container from the image & Run
docker run -it --name container1 myimage /bin/bash

Now do ls, you can see myvolume1

Now, share volume with another container 
Container1 -- Container2

docker run -it --name container2(new) --privileged=true --volumes from container1 centos /bin/bash

Now after creating container2, myvolumes is visible whatever you do in one volume, can see from other volume
touch /myvolume1/samplefile
docker start container1
docker attach container1
ls /myvolume1
you can see samplefile 


.....................................
Now try to create volume by using cmd
docker run -it --name container3 -v /volume2 centos /bin/bash

do ls - cd /volume2

Now create one file cont3file and exit
Now create one more container, and share volume

docker run -it --name container4 --privileged=true -it --name container4 --privileged=true --volumes-from container3 centos /bin/bash

Now you are inside container, do ls you can see volume2

Now create one file inside this volume and then check in container3, you can see that file

...........................................................
Volume (Host - container)
docker files in /home/ec2-user
docker run -it --name hostcount -v /home/ec2-user:/rajput --privileged=true centos /bin/bash

cd /rajput
do ls, now you can see all files of host machine

touch rajputfile 	(in container)
exit

Now check in EC2 machine, you can see this file

.......................
Some other cmd for volume

docker volume ls
docker volume create <Volume name>
docker volume rm <volume name>
docker volume prune	{it removed all unused docker volume}
docker volume inspect <volume name>
docker container inspect <container name>

.................................
Expose (port expose)

docker run -td --name techserver -p 80:80 centos	(d means daemon, it will run the docker container, but we not go inside it)

diff in EXPOSE cmd and -p 	if do EXPOSE cmd, then container can communicate to another container, cant go to host machine.
-p means expose for host and outside also

docker ps
docker port techserver			it will show all port of the container

docker exec -it techserver /bin/bash	to go inside the container
yum  install httpd -y
cd /var/www/html
echo "Subscribe Tech Guftugu" > index.html
systemctl start httpd

................................................
docker run -td --name myjenkins -p 8080:8080 jenkins

................................
diff b/w docker attach and docker exec
Docker exec creates a new process in the container's enviornment while docker attach just connect the standard input/output of the main process inside the container to corresponding standard input/output error of current terminal 

docker exec is specifically for running new things in a already started container, be it a shell or some other process.

what is the diff b/w expose and publish a docker?
basically you have three options
1. neither specify expose nor -p
2. only specify expose
3. specify expose and -p

1. if you specify neither expose nor -p, the service in the container will only be accessible from inside the container itself
2. if you expose a port, this service in the container is not accessible from outside docker, but from inside other docker containers, do this is good for inter-container communication.

3.if you expose and -p a port, the service in the container is accessible from anywhere, even outside docker.

................................................

upload container image to docker hub - pull/push

docker run -it ubuntu /bin/bash
Now create some files inside container 
Now create image of this container

docker commit container1 image1

Now create account in hub docker.com

Now on your instance
docker login

enter username/password

Now give tag to your image

docker tag image1 docker id/newimage	(newimage any name)
docker tag image1 manjeetyadav19/project1

docker push dockerid/newimage
docker push manjeetyadav19/project1

Now you can see this image in docker hub account

Now create one instance in tokyo region and pull image from hub

docker pull manjeetyadav19/project1
docker run -it --name mycontainer manjeetyadav19/project1 /bin/bash

...............................................
some important cmd

stop all running containers : docker stop $(docker ps -a -q)

delete all stopped contains : docker rm $(docker ps -a -q)

delete all images : docker rmi -f $(docker images -q)

................................................

Ansible - configuration managment tool  - ansible is agentless system like chef no client required, its use SSH directly to communicate

Anisible is an open-source IT configuration management, deployment and orchestration tool, it aims to provide large productivity gains to a wide variety of Automation challenges 

can use this tool whether your servers are in on-premises or in the cloud

It turns your code into infrastructure i.e your computing environment has some of the same attributes as your application.


Ansible server --------- node1, node2, node3

like recipe in chef, we have playbook in ansible

Resources in chef, modules in ansible

Advantages
Ansible is free to use.
Ansible is very consistent and lightweight and no constraints regarding the OS or Underlying H/W are present

It is very secure due to its agentless capatilities and open ssh security features 

Ansible does not need any special system administrator skills to install and use it (YAML)

Push mechanism

Disadvantages
Insufficient user interface, through ansible tower is GUI, but it is still in development stages
Cannot achieve full automation by ansible
New to the market, therefore limited support and document is available.

Terms used in Ansible
Ansible server - the machine where ansible is installed and from which all tasks and playbooks will be ran.
Module - Basically, a module is a cmd or set of similar cmds meant to be executed on the client-side.
Task - A task is a section that consists of a single procedure to be completed 
Role - A way of organising tasks and related files to be called is a playback. 
Fact - Information fetched from the client system from the global variables with the gather-facts operation

Inventory - file containing data about the ansible client servers
Play - execution of a playbook
handler - task which is called only if a notifier is present

Playbook - It consist code in YAML format, which describes tasks to be executed 
Host - Nodes, which are automated by ansible 

..........................................................

Create 3 instances in same AZ
Take access of all machines, Now go inside ansible server and download ansible package
wget http://.....rpm

Now do ls

yum install epel...rpm
yum update -y

Now we have to install all the packages one by one 

yum install git python python-level python-pip openssl ansible -y

Now go to hosts file inside ansible server and paste private-ip  of node1 & node2
vi etc/ansible/hosts
[demo]
node1 private ip 
node2 private ip 

Now this hosts file is only working after updating ansible.cfg file

vi etc/ansible/ansible.cfg

uncommented 
#inventory 
#etc/ansible/hosts
#sudo-user
#root

Now create one user, set passwd in all the three instances 

adduser ansible 
passwd ansible

Now switch as Ansible user 
su - ansible

This ansible user dont have sudo privilege .
visudo

Now go inside this file.
root	ALL=(ALL)	ALL
ansible	ALL=(ALL)	NOPASSWD:ALL

Now do this thing in other nodes also 
Now go to ansible server and try a install httpd package as a ansible user

sudo yum install httpd -y

Now establish connection b/w server and node go to another server 
ssh 172xxx

Now we have to do some changes in sshd_config file go into ansible server

vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config

Do some changes & save 
Do this work in node1 & node2 also, now verify in ansible server

su - ansible
ssh 172xxxx

now it ask for passwd, enter the passwd, after that you will be inside node1

..................................................................

Now do ssh-keygen
ls -a
 cd ./ssh
ls
id_rsa id_rsa_pub

copy to node1, node2

ssh-copy-id ansible@172.31.27.226


54.179.16.139	172.31.27.226
13.229.247.99	172.31.30.185
54.169.186.120	172.31.29.92

ssh -i "AWSSingaporeKey.pem" ec2-user@ec2-54-179-16-139.ap-southeast-1.compute.amazonaws.com
ssh -i "AWSSingaporeKey.pem" ec2-user@ec2-13-229-247-99.ap-southeast-1.compute.amazonaws.com
ssh -i "AWSSingaporeKey.pem" ec2-user@ec2-54-169-186-120.ap-southeast-1.compute.amazonaws.com

"all" pattern refers to all the machines in an inventory 
ansible all --list-hosts
ansible <group-name> --list-hosts
ansible <group-name>[0] --list-hosts		1,2,3......-1

groupname[0] pick 1st node
groupname[-1] pick last node
groupname[1-2] pick 2st to 3rd node
groupname1,groupname2 pick multiple group
demo[0-1],test[0-1]

.........................................

1. Ad-hoc cmd		simple linux cmd (temp), but no idempotency
2. Modules		| yaml lang  | single cmd run at a time, 1 module at a time	
3. Playbooks 		| yaml lang. | if run more then 1 module is call playbook

Ansible modules and playbooks both have idempotency, and its use setup module, its just like ohai in chef

Ad-hoc cmds are cmds which can be run individually to perform quick functions

These ad-hoc cmds are not used for configuration managment and deployment, becz these cmd are one time usage
The ansible ad-hoc cmd uses the /usr/bin/ansible cmd line tool to automate a single task

go to ansible server
ansible demo -a "ls"			-a means argument
ansible demo[0] -a "touch file"	
ansible all -a "touch file1"


ansible demo -a "sudo yum install httpd -y"
ansible demo -ba "yum install httpd -y"
ansible demo -ba "yum remove httpd -y"


Ansible Modules
Ansible ships with a number of modules (called module libary) that can be executed directly on remote hosts or through playbooks

your library of modules can reside on any machine, and there are no servers, daemon, or databases required 

The default location for the inventory file is /etc/ansible/hosts

Ansible Modules
ansible demo -b -m yum -a "pkg=httpd state=present"		install=present, uninstall=absent, update=latest
ansible demo -b -m yum -a "pkg=httpd state=latest"
ansible demo -b -m yum -a "pkg=httpd state=absent"
ansible demo -b -m service -a "name=httpd state=started"
ansible demo -b -m user -a "name=raj"
ansible demo -b -m copy -a "src=file1 dest=/tmp"


Setup Module
ansible demo -m setup
ansible demo -m setup -a "filter=*ipv4*"
.....................................................

Playbook 

playbook is ansible are written in YAML format
It is human readable data serialzation lang. it is commonly used for configuration files.

Playbook is like a file where you write codes. consist of vars, tasks, handlers, files, templates and roles.

Each playbook is composed of one or more 'modules' in a list module is a collection of configuration files.

playbooks are divided into many sections like 
Target section - hosts or nodes, defines the host agaist which playbooks task has to be executed

variables section - define variable 

Task section - list of all modules that we need to run in order

YAML

for ansible, nearly every YAML files starts with a list.

Each item in the list is a list of key-value pairs commonly called a directory.

All YAML files have to begin "..."

All members of a list lines must begin with same indentation level starting with "_"

for eg

--- # a list of fruits
	fruits:
	-mango
	-strawberry
	-banana
	-grapes
	-apple	
...

a dictionary is represented in a simple key: value form
for eg
	--- # detail of customer
	customer:
		name: _rajput
		job: _dob

...........................

playbook
vi target.yml
--- # Target playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh
  gather_facts: yes
		

Now to execute this playbook
ansible-playbook target.yml

................................
Now create one more playbook in ansible server
vi target.yml
--- # Target playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh
  
  tasks: 
  - name: install httpd on linux
    action: yum name=httpd state=installed

.....................................................

Varible
Ansible uses varibles which are defined previously to enable more flexibilty in playbooks and roles
They can be used to loop through a set of given values, access various information likes the host name of a system and replaces certain strings in templetes with specifi values.

put variable section above task so that we define it first & use it later

now 
vi vars.yml
--- # my variable playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh

  vars:
    pkgname: httpd    
  
  tasks: 
  - name: install httpd on linux
    action: yum name='{{pkgname}}' state=installed

 ...........................

Handler Section
A handle is exactly the same as a task, but it will run when called by another task

OR 

handler are just liker regular tasks in an ansible playbook, but are only run if the task contains a notify directive and also indicates that it changed something

handler use where we have dependency, eg task have httpd service install and start, but in case httpd service did nt install, then no point to start service, so there is dependency, so 1st task need to perform 1st

vi handler.yml
--- # handler playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh

  tasks: 
  - name: install httpd on linux
    action: yum name=httpd state=installed
    notify: restart HTTPD

  handlers:
  - name: restart HTTPD
    action: service name=httpd state=restarted
.........................................................

Dry run
check whether the playbook is formatted correctly

ansible-playbook handler.yml --check

Loops
sometimes you want to repeat a task multiple times, in computer programming, this is called loops, common ansible include changing Ownership on several files and/or directives with the files module, creating multiple, users with the user module , and repeating a polling step until certain result is reached.

vi loops.yml
--- # loops playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh

  tasks:
   - name: add a list of users
     user: name='{{item}}' state=present
     with_items:
             - manjeet
             - yadav
             - rohit
             - soname
             - suresh
..................................

Conditions
Whenever we have diff diff scenarios, 
we put contitions according to the scenario

when statement
sometimes you want to skip a particular cmd in a particular node
vi condition.yml
--- # loops playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh

  tasks:
   - name: install httpd service centos
     command: yum -y install httpd
     when: ansible_os_family == "RedHat"
   - name: install apach service on ubuntu
     command: apt-get -y install apache2
     when: ansible_os_family == "Debian"

.....................................

Vault	- passwd protected

Ansible allows keeping senstive data such as passwords on keys in encrypted files, rather than a plaintext in your playbook

creating a new encrypted playbook
ansible-vault create vault.yml

editing the encrypted playbook
ansible-vault edit vault.yml

To change the password
ansible-vault rekey vault.yml

To encrypt an existing playbook
ansible-vault encrypt target.yml

To decrypt an encrypt playbook
ansible-vault decrypt target.yml

.............................................

Roles
We can use two techinques for recuring a set of tasks: includes, and roles

Roles are good for organising tasks and encapsulating data needed to accomplish those tasks

we can organise playbooks into a directory structure called roles

			Ansible Roles
			

adding more and more functionality to the playbook will make it difficult to maintain in a single file.

Roles
Default: It store the data about role/application default variables e.g. - if you want to run to port 80 or 8080 then variable needs to define in this path.

Files: it contains files need to be transferred to the remote VM (state files)

Handler: they are trigger or task we can segregate all the handler required in playbook

Meta: this directory contain files that establish roles dependencies  eg. auther name, supported platform, dependencies if any

Tasks: it contains all the tasks that is normally in the playbook, eg installing packages and copies files also.

Vars: Variables for the role can be specified in this directory and used in your configuration files both vars and default store variables



.............................
	|		|
	master.yml	roles(dir)
	|		|
	target		myroles(sub dir)
	|		|
	roles		task(again sub dir)(main.yml)
	|		|
	myroles		var(again sub dir)(main.yml)
			| 
			handler(again sub dir)(main.yml)

Roles

mkdir -p playbook/roles/webserver/tasks
tree

touch playbook/roles/webserver/tasks/main.yml

touch playbook/master.yml

vi playbook/roles/webserver/tasks/main.yml
- name: install httpd
  yum: pkg=httpd state=latest


vi master.yml
--- # master playbook
- hosts: demo
  user: ansible
  become: yes
  connection: ssh

  roles:
          - webserver

..................................................

Kubernetes is an open-source container orchestration system
Manage by workstation - K8s, and written in go lang

Docker Swarm == kubernettes

kubernette created by google, since 2003 and its name was borg, its donated by goolge to 2014 linux foundation

Linux foundation - sub cloud native computing foundation - and in 2015 its lunched kubernetts open source v1.0
latest v1.18

CKA certified kubernettes administrator 

Kubernetes 					containerized App
 		Managed containerized apps
			Deploying
			scheduling
			scaling
			load balancing
			batch execution
			rollbacks
			monitoring

Components
1. API Server
2. Scheduler
3. Controller
4. ETCD database
5. kube proxy
6. kubelet
7. container - Docker
8. POD


Api server - our system need to communicate with cluster, it will be happen from the API server, every communication from scheduler, controller, database, continer etc happen through Api server

Scheduler/controller/datatbase can be possible on master node, or we can put each one on diff node also.

But in docker swarm all of them remain on 1 node

Worker node
kube - proxy , kubelet , docker container ......so these 3 possible on all worker node

POD - each container work within POD.

Eg - kuber admin send 1 request .... kubectl run web-server --imageengine
request recive on API server, it will pass to scheduler, scheduler will check where should create container(Under POD) on the basis of ram, space etc available, it could be possible it will create on master node, or worknode1 , 2 etc

scheduler go through API server to kubelet and ask for create node, kubelet will create a POD, and kubelet will ask to docker, create container within POD, so docker will create container, and inform back to kubelet, and kubelet will inform back to scheduler work is done.

Kube proxy work related to network, network related management, kubl proxy give information to schedule it provided ip to the newly created POD(container)	

Now  scheduler inform through API Server to database about container, and database put information related to the that new POD(container)

scheduler also inform through API server to controller, that (POD)container created, now Controller job started, to control container, related to keep container up and running, all work related to container managment, in case container got deleted, it will recreate container again.

POD - is logical boundary of container, POD is also collection of multiple container

In POD we can keep single container, or we can put multiple container also 

POD benifits

In case no POD defined
if something happen with Container, it cant create another container again, if we create container again, we will not able to get same ip again.

In case POD defined. - by default 2 container
Pause Image - it will contain POD ip and namespace of POD store here, its default, it create itself, this pause image also contain other container namespace in it. ip always assign to POD, its not assign to container, so no effect in case container delete or recreating again.

In case if we have POD, we have redundency, if container delete, another container can create,

In case something happen with POD, then we have concept deployment - service
Service have 3 types:
1.Cluster IP
2.NodePort
3.LoadBalancer

we we using LoadBalancer then it consist 1. and 2. point itself.

cmd: kuberctl run db-server --image=mysql
kuberctl run web-server --image=wordpress

another container - that is we create for any purpose
...............................................................

Kubernets Deployment Strategies
Rolling deployment 	its by default
Recreate 
Canary Deploment (most imp) its also blue & green and Red & black deployment

..........................................

Kubernets vs Docker swarm vs Apache Mesos


...........................................

create 3 node cluster

run cloud shell

for access shell from google cloud
gcloud container clusters get-credentials mycluster --zone us-centrali --project oceanic-work

kubectl get nodes 	it will show all nodes

kubectl get pods		it show all pods
kubectl get nodes -o wide	it will show wide inform


copy  all file from git hub
git clone https://github.com/vipin2411/k8.git
all yml file for kubernetes script


single container pod
app: nginxweb
type: production
ver:v1
nginx:alpine

multi-container pod
app: nginxweb
type: production
ver:v1
nginx:alpine
vipin2411/curl


when we create pod we use cmd line or yml file
pod-without-port-lable.yaml
apiVersion: v1 
kind: Pod 
metadata: 
 name: webserver
spec: 
 containers:
 - name: web
   image: nginx:alpine

pod cmd
cat pod-without-port-lable.yaml

kuberctl get pods
check pod is already running 

kuberctl describe pods
detail info about pods

kuberctl create -f pod-without-port-label.yaml
creates the object specified in yaml file. in our case, object is pod

kuberctl get pods
now initially, it was showing status "ContainerCreating", then it changed to "Running"

kuberctl get pods -o wide
with "-o wide", we will get additional infor regarding pod IP and node on which it is scheduled

kuberctl describe pods/webserver
(gives detailed info about "webserver" pod. due to lengthy output, we are not interested in showing the whole output)

kuberctl describe pods/webserver | tail
(it will show last 10 lines of output)

kuberctl exec -it wehserver sh
(with "kuberctl exec" cmd we can run cmds inside container or can enter into container by using other options "-i" and -t by default, it will take us into first container of pod)

kuberctl exec -it -c web webserver sh
(we can specify which particular container you want to access in interactive mode. in this case we want to enter into "web" container of "webserver" pod)

kuberctl delete -f pod-without-port-label.yaml
will delete the pod "webserver"

pod-curl.yaml

apiVersion:v1
kind: Pod
metadata: 
 name: browswer
spec:
 containers:
 - name: curl
   image: vipin2411/curl
   imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
   command: ['sh','-c','echo Pod running: sleep 7200']

in the file, we have specified the image pull as "IfNotPresent" which means that we are instructing to kubernets to not pull the image from the registry, if it is already present on the node.

But why we have added the cmd in container specifications? what is the purpose of this cmd and what it is doing. As such this cmd will just echo the comment "Pod running" and then go to sleep for 7200 seconds (2 hours). which means that for 2 hours some process will keep on running and our container will not get terminated.

what will happen, if we will not specify the cmd. in that case your container will get created and immediately get terminated. thus your pod will never get created.

then why we did not specify any cmd during creation of "webserver" pod from "nginx:alpine" image. this is becz when we use any web server image, by default, one daemon process is alwasy running.

pod-with-port.yaml

apiVersion:v1
kind: Pod
metadata: 
 name: browswer
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
spec:
 containers:
 - name: web
   image: nginx:1:16-alpine
   ports:
   - containerPort:80


Pod to Pod communication
Node to Pod communication

pod-multi-container.yaml

apiVersion:v1
kind: Pod
metadata: 
 name: webserver
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
  type: production
  ver: v1
spec:
 containers:
 - name: web
   image: nginx:1.16-alpine
 - name: curl
   image: vipin2411/curl
   command: ["/bin/sh","-c","while:;do curl http://localhost:80/; done"]
  
How to install kubelete, kubeadm, and kubectl

Steps and Commands:

(This assumes you have 3 servers up and running)

yum install docker -y

cat <<EOF > /etc/yum.repos.d/kubernetes.repo
[kubernetes]
name=Kubernetes
baseurl=https://packages.cloud.google.com/yum/repos/kubernetes-el7-x86_64
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
repo_gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=https://packages.cloud.google.com/yum/doc/yum-key.gpg https://packages.cloud.google.com/yum/doc/rpm-package-key.gpg
EOF


sudo yum install -y kubelet kubeadm kubectl

systemctl enable kubelet

systemctl start kubelet



3. On each server, enable the use of iptables 
echo "net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables=1" | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.conf
sudo sysctl -p

4. On the Master server only, initialize the cluster
sudo kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16

(After this command finishes, copy kubeadm join provided)

5. On the Master server only, set up the kubernetes configuration file for general usage
mkdir -p $HOME/.kube
sudo cp -i /etc/kubernetes/admin.conf $HOME/.kube/config
sudo chown $(id -u):$(id -g) $HOME/.kube/config

6. On the Master server only, apply a common networking plugin. In this case, Flannel
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cor...

7. On the Worker servers only, join them to the cluster using the command you copied earlier. 
kubeadm join 172.31.37.80:6443 --token ... --discovery-token-ca-cert-hash ...

And that's it! You should now have a working kubernetes cluster!

--- 
Great resources I used to learn how to work with Kubernetes:
1. Linux Academy (https://linuxacademy.com/)
2. Udemy: Docker and Kubernetes: The Complete Guide (https://www.udemy.com/course/docker-a...)
3. Kubernetes Documentation (https://kubernetes.io/docs/home/)
4. Just play with it!


kubernetes installation on centos 7


Welcome || Asian Eye institute_Project || Project ID: 16152

Re: AMEYO -- Basic training session
Re: Welcome || Iradium Automobiles Private Limited_Project || Project ID: 16201
Adding a new campaign Pharmadex_DCA20210514153141
Ameyo IVR Concern-Urgent


Dear Shivam,



Dear Shivam,

We called @9911551339 however, call was not answered.

Please call us on Support Numbers (+01244771072) for discussion about raised concern.

Awaiting your response to process the ticket further.

Thanks and Regards,

Manjeet Yadav.


Dear Abhilash, 

We are checking the concern internally, 

We will update you further accordingly.

Regards
Manjeet

1pm - 2:30pm check apr interval summary - agent took some calls

acd interval summary - 1pm - 

Dear Shivam,

We are checking, we will update you on this further.

Regards
Manjeet

Reporting Issue DCA20210514153098


Dear Anupriya,

We called @9311817281 however, call was not answered.

Please call us on Support Numbers (+01244771072) for discussion about raised concern.

Awaiting your response to process the ticket further.

Thanks and Regards,

Manjeet Yadav.


7595841964	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-78982	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 12:55:21 PM
9064529967	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-79631	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:08:02 PM
9641737701	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-79707	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:09:59 PM
6294827155	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-80511	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:25:32 PM
7501775538	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-81083	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:37:23 PM
9123724454	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-81362	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:43:16 PM
8240400254	912241078133	inbound.call.dial	d657-60997e94-vcall-81967	ANSWERED	13/05/2021 1:57:30 PM




       node_name        |     next_node_name      |           transition_event           | meta_data 
-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------+-----------
 startNode               | chkHoliday              | script.node.success                  | 
 chkHoliday              | chkOfficeHour           | holiday.configuration.not.found      | 
 chkOfficeHour           | welcomeNode             | office.hour.found.transition.success | 
 welcomeNode             | Main_Menu               | success.listen.voice.log             | 
 Main_Menu               | CallRecordingMesageNode | success.collect.digit                | 2
 CallRecordingMesageNode | Script                  | failure.listen.voice.log             | 
 Script                  | Menu2_Queue             | script.node.success                  | 
 Menu2_Queue             | crm                     | success                              | 
 crm                     | extension               | success                              | 
 extension               | start_monitor           | dial.connected                       | 
 start_monitor           | stop2                   | success                              | 
 stop2                   |                         |                                      | 
(12 rows)


 select * from call_history where call_id ='d252-60944b27-vcall-819184';
-[ RECORD 1 ]--------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
call_id                    | d252-60944b27-vcall-819184
call_leg_id                | d252-60944b27-inc-call-leg-AirtelMediator3477804
contact_center_id          | 168
process_id                 | 492
campaign_id                | 477
phone                      | 9849795787
crt_object_id              | d252-60944b27-vce-daf-192186
customer_id                | -1
lead_id                    | 
dialing_comments           | 918045413282
is_outbound                | f
call_type                  | inbound.call.dial
system_disposition         | CONNECTED
date_added                 | 2021-05-15 10:03:24.677
db_date                    | 2021-05-15 10:20:58.920476
call_result                | SUCCESS
hangup_cause               | normal.clearing
hangup_cause_description   | OK
hangup_cause_code          | 200
hangup_first               | f
hangup_on_hold             | f
call_originate_time        | 2021-05-15 10:03:24.677
call_end_time              | 2021-05-15 10:20:11.293
setup_time                 | 98
ringing_time               | 0
ivr_time                   | 318304
talk_time                  | 688181
hold_time                  | 0
recording_file_url         | dacx://16@com-drishti-dacx-core-callmanager-asterisk-IAsteriskComponent:8008/dacx/var/ameyo/dacxdata/voicelogs/Delightful_Gourmet/2021-0
5-15/catherinedeepika@licious.com/9849795787_catherinedeepika@licious.com_2021-05-15-10-03-24
nodeflow_id                | d252-60944b27-nf-2746796
actual_channel             | SIP/AirtelMediator-000e3142
dtmf_info                  | 
column_1                   | 
value_1                    | 
column_2                   | 
value_2                    | 
column_3                   | 
value_3                    | 
archive_id                 | 79250634
connection_state           | 
connection_state_data      | 
customer_source            | 
filter_source              | 
is_test_call               | f
num_attempts               | 0
hangup_details             | SYSTEM_HANGUP
related_crt_object_id      | 
nodeflow_meta_data         | 
dialed_call_details        | {"d252-60944b27-inc-call-leg-AirtelMediator3477804":{"9849795787":"connected"}}
crm_url                    | https://app24.ameyoemerge.in:8785/delightful2level/customer.php?queueId=664&dstPhone=918045413282&campaignId=477&associationType=inbound
.dial.association&sessionId=d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika%40licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677&maskingEnabled=false&userId=catherinedeepika%40licious.com&callType=inbou
nd.call.dial&crm_push_generated_time=1621053502469&userCrtObjectId=d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika%40licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677-uce-9481013373%401061&queueName=in
bound+queue&phone=9849795787&crtObjectId=d252-60944b27-vce-daf-192186
ringing_start_time         | 
src_phone                  | 9849795787
dst_phone                  | 918045413282
dialled_phone              | 918045413282
customer_data              | {}
vq_request_id              | 
lead_name                  | 
ucc_customer_id            | 
callback_id                | 
inbound_call_failure_stage | 

select * from cm_cdr_history where call_leg_id ='d252-60944b27-inc-call-leg-AirtelMediator3477804';
-[ RECORD 1 ]----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------
call_leg_id                        | d252-60944b27-inc-call-leg-AirtelMediator3477804
call_context_id                    | 1260
voice_resource_id                  | 16
entity_name                        | AirtelMediator
src_phone                          | 9849795787
dst_phone                          | 918045413282
vr_call_leg_id                     | asterisk-callleg-16-nonoriginating-4939902
properties                         | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_DEST_HOST=10.255.36.212                              +
                                   | SRC_PHONE=9849795787                                                +
                                   | techSpecificId=                                                     +
                                   | tech.specific.id=78aadff303dd5406227a0e504c4c545a@dynamic           +
                                   | which.side.hungup=us                                                +
                                   | hungup.by.action=true                                               +
                                   | actual.channel=SIP/AirtelMediator-000e3142                          +
                                   | voice.resource.initialization.timestamp=Sat May 15 10:03:24 IST 2021+
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_DEST_PORT=15278                                      +
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_SRC_PORT=18240                                       +
                                   | MEDIA_USER_AGENT=Asterisk PBX certified/13.21-cert3                 +
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_CODECS_JOINT_CAPABILITY=(alaw)                       +
                                   | hangup.time=2021-05-15 10:20:11.272
actual_channel                     | SIP/AirtelMediator-000e3142
hangup_cause                       | normal.clearing
hangup_cause_code                  | 200
setup_time_out                     | 0
ring_time_out                      | 0
setup_time                         | 98
ring_time                          | 0
talk_time                          | 1006518
start_time                         | 2021-05-15 10:03:24.677
end_time                           | 2021-05-15 10:20:11.272
voice_resource_initialization_time | 2021-05-15 10:03:24.675
tech_specific_id                   | 78aadff303dd5406227a0e504c4c545a@dynamic
which_side_hungup                  | us
dialled_phone                      | 918045413282
archive_id                         | 

select * from user_disposition_history where call_id ='d252-60944b27-vcall-819184';
-[ RECORD 1 ]----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
archive_id             | 18548514
id                     | d252-60944b27-user-disp-h-439162
call_id                | d252-60944b27-vcall-819184
call_leg_id            | d252-60944b27-out-call-leg-PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR3480598
date_added             | 2021-05-15 10:08:22.469
db_date                | 2021-05-15 10:20:58.920476
user_disposition_time  | 2021-05-15 10:20:21.566
transfer_time          | 
transfer_to            | 
disposition_details    | 
disposition_class      | campaign.system.disposition
disposition_code       | wrap.timeout
user_id                | catherinedeepika@licious.com
session_id             | d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika@licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677
user_crt_object_id     | d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika@licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677-uce-9481013373@1061
wrap_time              | 10310
talk_time              | 688240
working                | t
campaign_team_id       | 
disposed_by_crm        | f
agent_queue_id         | 664
auto_call_on_time      | 717951
auto_call_off_time     | 0
user_connected_time    | 2021-05-15 10:08:43.016
user_disconnected_time | 2021-05-15 10:20:11.256
campaign_id            | 477
association_type       | inbound.dial.association
request_id             | d252-60944b27-res-req-474354
preview_start_time     | 
preview_duration       | 
hold_time              | 0
additional_parameters  | 
customer_hold_time     | 0
notes                  | 
all_group_ids          | 
-[ RECORD 2 ]----------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
archive_id             | 18548513
id                     | d252-60944b27-user-disp-h-439161
call_id                | d252-60944b27-vcall-819184
call_leg_id            | d252-60944b27-out-call-leg-PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR3480248
date_added             | 2021-05-15 10:07:44.823
db_date                | 2021-05-15 10:20:58.920476
user_disposition_time  | 2021-05-15 10:08:22.399
transfer_time          | 
transfer_to            | 
disposition_details    | 
disposition_class      | campaign.system.disposition
disposition_code       | failed.association
user_id                | catherinedeepika@licious.com
session_id             | d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika@licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677
user_crt_object_id     | d252-60944b27-ses-catherinedeepika@licious.com-3f9YbLzU-95677-uce-9481013373@1061
wrap_time              | 0
talk_time              | 0
working                | t
campaign_team_id       | 
disposed_by_crm        | f
agent_queue_id         | 664
auto_call_on_time      | 35954
auto_call_off_time     | 0
user_connected_time    | 
user_disconnected_time | 2021-05-15 10:08:22.399
campaign_id            | 477
association_type       | inbound.dial.association
request_id             | d252-60944b27-res-req-474125
preview_start_time     | 
preview_duration       | 
hold_time              | 0
additional_parameters  | 
customer_hold_time     | 0
notes                  | 
all_group_ids          | 

select * from cm_cdr_history where call_leg_id ='d252-60944b27-out-call-leg-PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR3480598';
-[ RECORD 1 ]----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------
call_leg_id                        | d252-60944b27-out-call-leg-PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR3480598
call_context_id                    | 1061
voice_resource_id                  | 16
entity_name                        | PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR
src_phone                          | 9849795787
dst_phone                          | 9481013373
vr_call_leg_id                     | asterisk-callleg-16-originating-4942657
properties                         | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_DEST_HOST=10.255.36.212                              +
                                   | SRC_PHONE=9849795787                                                +
                                   | techSpecificId=51d0ae2d03377c5704027d2b4081678c@ims.airtel.in       +
                                   | tech.specific.id=51d0ae2d03377c5704027d2b4081678c@ims.airtel.in     +
                                   | MEDIA_Ring=183                                                      +
                                   | which.side.hungup=us                                                +
                                   | hungup.by.action=true                                               +
                                   | actual.channel=SIP/PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR-000e3387                 +
                                   | voice.resource.initialization.timestamp=Sat May 15 10:08:23 IST 2021+
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_DEST_PORT=17900                                      +
                                   | MEDIA_P_Preferred_Identity=<sip:+918045413282@ims.airtel.in>        +
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_SRC_PORT=16420                                       +
                                   | MEDIA_INFO_RTP_CODECS_JOINT_CAPABILITY=(alaw)                       +
                                   | hangup.time=2021-05-15 10:20:11.235
actual_channel                     | SIP/PrimaryliciousAirtelBLR-000e3387
hangup_cause                       | normal.clearing
hangup_cause_code                  | 200
setup_time_out                     | 35000
ring_time_out                      | 35000
setup_time                         | 4106
ring_time                          | 14629
talk_time                          | 688907
start_time                         | 2021-05-15 10:08:23.615
end_time                           | 2021-05-15 10:20:11.235
voice_resource_initialization_time | 2021-05-15 10:08:23.615
tech_specific_id                   | 51d0ae2d03377c5704027d2b4081678c@ims.airtel.in
which_side_hungup                  | us
dialled_phone                      | 9481013373
archive_id                         | 


       node_name        |     next_node_name      |           transition_event           | meta_data |   duration   
-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------------------+-----------+--------------
 startScript             | StartPlayWelcome        | script.node.success                  |           | 00:00:00.002
 StartPlayWelcome        | checkHoliday            | success.listen.voice.log             |           | 00:00:05.565
 checkHoliday            | dummyScript             | holiday.configuration.not.found      |           | 00:00:00.001
 dummyScript             | checkOfficehr           | script.node.success                  |           | 00:00:00
 checkOfficehr           | CallRecordingMesageNode | office.hour.found.transition.success |           | 00:00:00.001
 CallRecordingMesageNode | ACDNode                 | success.listen.voice.log             |           | 00:00:07.626
 ACDNode                 | CRMNode                 | success                              |           | 00:04:06.95
 CRMNode                 | ChildNode               | success                              |           | 00:00:00.001
 ChildNode               | OriginateCrt            | sync.child.flow.success              |           | 00:00:01.619
 OriginateCrt            | reAcd                   | no.answer                            |           | 00:00:35.954
 ACDNode                 | CRMNode                 | success                              |           | 00:00:00.071
 reAcd                   | ACDNode                 | script.node.success                  |           | 00:00:00
 CRMNode                 | ChildNode               | success                              |           | 00:00:00.001
 ChildNode               | OriginateCrt            | sync.child.flow.success              |           | 00:00:01.144
 OriginateCrt            | playBlank               | connected                            |           | 00:00:18.738
 playBlank               | MakeCall                | success.listen.voice.log             |           | 00:00:00.663
 MakeCall                | MonitorNode             | success                              |           | 00:00:00.065
 MonitorNode             | stopSuccess             | success                              |           | 00:00:00.001
 stopSuccess             |                         |                                      |           | 00:00:00



Organization
Folder
Project
Resource

GCP is hierarchy structure

Compute is available in GCP, like you can select 2gb ram, 200gb room

ML AI

SDN Software-defined networking


In GCP we have project number, that is unique number, also you can put billing on project basis also

Everything is there start with V, virtual instance, virtual private network

famous hypervisor Esxi, and google use kvm, hvm


ID access request


........................................
Docker Environment

Docker Engine - Docker CLI - Docker API - Docker Daemon
Docker Objects - Docker images - Docker containers - Docker volumes - Docker networks - Docker swarm nodes & services
Docker Registry
Docker Compose 
Docker Swarm

Docker Objects - 
Docker images - Docker images are sets of instructions that are used to create containers and execute code inside it.
Docker containers 
Docker volumes
Docker networks 
Docker swarm nodes & services


................................................



Pod creation Using CLI  - stand alone pods

creating pods using CLI without specifying "yaml" file. As such, not recommended method, but still we will go ahead with creating 2 different pods using 2 different pods using different images as we did with "yaml" files. Four types of objects can be created by using CLI. The object are Pods, Deployments, Jobs, CronJobs Which type of object gets created will depend upon the options passed. Here we are interested in creating pods.

$kuberctl run webserver --image=nginx:alpine --restart=Never
(create pod "webserver" from "nginx:alpine" image. we have defined restart policy as "Never" which means that if somehow, pod gets terminated, do not restart it. if we are not going to specify restart option, then deployment (deploy) plus replicaset (rs) object will get created)

$kuberctl run curl --rm --restart=Never --image=vipin2411/curl -it --sh
(it will create pod "curl" in interactive mode. on exit from the pod, pod will automatically gets terminated due to "--rm" option)


Kubernetes ReplicaSet

		replica set
		  |
Pod	--- 	Pods

There are many ways we can create pods. Till now we have created the pods directly by using "yaml" file. As such, creating pods in this way is not the recommended. There are many issues with this approach. First of all if we have to create hundreds of pods. we will have to create hundreds of "yaml" files or run pod creation cmds hundreds of time. Not a good idea at all. Other is when pods gets terminated unexpectly, we have to create that pod manually.

So to solve these problems, kubernetes have defined numbers of objects which can create pods at a scale and can solve pod termination issue. Two of the most used objects are ReplicaSet and Deplyment. We can specify numbers of pods required to these objects. Now it is the responsiblility of these objects to keep that numbers of pods running.


ReplicaSet Yaml file

pod-using-replica-set-ml.yaml

apiVersion: apps/v1 
kind: ReplicaSet
metadata:
 name: webserver-rs
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector:
 matchlabels:
  app: nginxweb
 template:
  metadata:
   labels:
    app: nginxweb
    env: development
  spec:
   conainers:
    - name: web
    image: nginx:1:16-alpine


ReplicaSet commands

$ cat pod-using-replica-set-ml.yaml
(View replicaset "yaml" file)

$ kuberctl create -f pod-using-replica-set-ml.yaml
(create "webserver-rs" replicaset object)

$ kuberctl get rs
(it is shocking that all the 3 desired pods are in ready state)

$ kuberctl get pods
(all the three pods are running)

$ kubectl get pods -o wide
(gives additional information such as IP addresses and nodes)

$ kuberctl get pods --show-labels
(shows labels on pods) 


pod-using-replica-set-ml.yaml

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: ReplicaSet
metadata:
 name: webserver-rs
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector: 
  matchLabels:
   app: nginxweb
  template:
   metadata:
    labels:
     app: nginxweb
     env: development
    spec:
     containers:
     - name: web
       image

When have you handled huge pressure in a work-related situation?
I studied the brief carefully and then created a plan of action for getting the project delivered on budget and also on time.

It was tough going, but i put in the extra hours' work needed and i am pleased to say i managed to get the project finished on time and to specification. my supervisor was thrilled with my work ethic and effor, and he hanked me for my commitment and dedication to delivering this important project.

Can you describe a stressful situation and how you handled it?
when pri line got down, or application down, application got slow, down time is there.

customer calling, keep calling, and need to answer to customer, and need to give assurance, it will resolve ASAP.

also work side by side to resolve the issue, 1st identify, then try to resolve the issue 1st and inform to customer about down is resolved, 

And the provide the RCA

@ Can you give an example of how you dealt with conflict in the workplace?
in my previous organisation 1 of my colleague had problem with my, not sure he not liked my work, or jealous about my initiative or performace, 

so i have ask him personally 1 meeting, just causal meeting, started with basic conversation, so make him what i am, what i feel and how i think, i cleared myself, i have no hard feeling for him or anybody, i have helping nature, also explained if something required in office and working enviorment, then we have do it, even its not my area of interest or other person in the team, but as team we have to perform the task, because that is requirment, and company demanded and its need to be done.

But personally whatever i can do professionally, any help he need or other team member need i will be ready to do. i am not jealous by anybody or i am not  un-cooperative with you or other member in team.  

then he started understanding me, and the environment is created in the team, whatever task we receive, we started done effectively and we done our best, whenever any help required within team, we done as much as possible.


Can you tell me about a mistake you made at work and how handled it?
Not any big mistake recently, but i have done when i was new in the company, and i was part of testing team, i was doing a competiblity test of application with the customer database replica with our new application upgrade release, During the testing, while we apply patch, i made mistake, i applied patch without remove some previous history database, like data_base version history, and database_schema_version history. and database got corrupted, and this database was around 100gb size, 

So i have acknolege my mistake, and informed to the manager, i got annoyed, the main reason because, we have committed time to the customer, about new release upgrade, we had some fixes in the current release, and database is got corrupted, now 1 more extra day was required, and it need to confirm inform again to the customer, and that customer is very cencitive customer, it was not easy to give any excuse easly to this customer, somehow we got 1 more extra day, and i have restored another copy of that database by self in 24 hours, and processed CDC process further.


Can you tell me about a time you had to deal with an irate customer or client?
i am also a part of escalation team, we are multi tasker in our team, so sometime we go for escalation call, and meeting, where we have customer side, and from our side our account manager, and technical team, so as part of technicall team, i use to join those meeting, we use to discuss all pain and problem from the customer side. 

personally i use to write all technicall point customer getting trouble, it could be usablity issue, or it could be genuine issue, or bug in the application or process customer observe.

 
once customer explain everything and all pain, then i acknolege his all trouble point wise point, and then i start resolving, 
step by step, if just usablity issue related to our application, we use to explain on same time, 
some point need some analysis so we bear some time.
and if issue is genuine issue, we raise it further in our organiztion, issue could be related to product or bug, etc.
And we acknolge the issue, and we provid TAT for that issue.

so here 99% percent customer got satisfied
 

What about bandwidth for VoIP?
signaling protocol SIP, H.323 or MGCP  - set up, disconnect and control the calls and telephony features

Voice over IP (VoIP) is the descriptor for the technology used to carry digitised voice over an IP data network. VoIP requires two classes of protocols: a signaling protocol such as SIP, H.323 or MGCP that is used to set up, disconnect and control the calls and telephony features; and a protocol to carry speech packets.


The Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) carries speech transmission. RTP is an IETF standard introduced in 1995 when H.323 was standardised. RTP will work with any signaling protocol. It is the commonly used protocol among IP PBX vendors.

An IP phone or softphone generates a voice packet every 10, 20, 30 or 40ms, depending on the vendor's implementation.

The 10 to 40ms of digitised speech can be uncompressed, compressed and even encrypted. This does not matter to the RTP protocol. As you have already figured out, it takes many packets to carry one word. 


https://sites.google.com/a/ameyo.com/engineering/Home/generalknowledgebase/how-much-bandwidth-is-required-for-a-voip-call

 SIP Debugging 

    Terminology and Concepts

The SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) is a text-based protocol, similar to the HTTP and SMTP, designed for initiating, maintaining, and terminating interactive communication sessions between users. Such sessions include voice, video, chat, interactive games, and virtual reality.

    UAC (User agent client)  client in the terminal that initiates SIP signaling
    UAS (User agent server)  server in the terminal that responds to the SIP signaling from the UAC
    UA (User Agent)  SIP network terminal (SIP telephones, or gateway to other networks), contains UAC and UAS
    Proxy server  receives connection requests from the UA and transfers them to another proxy server if the particular station is not in its administration
    Redirect server  receives connection requests and sends them back to the requester including destination data instead of sending them to the calling party
    Location Server  receives registration requests from the UA and updates the terminal database with them.




CPP database skill media 1


invented telphony - Alexander Graham bell - 7th-mar-1876
25th-jan -1915 -AT&t - 5 day took -new york to san fancisco	
1995 - 1st internet s/f phone by vocaltec
2003 - skype creating n/w of people using VOIP
2007 - iphone 1st smartphone

Asterisk - open source s/w pbx
works on popular linux distributions
also available as a standalone linux distribution call AsteriskNow
Support VOIP.

Ameyo call manager based on Asterisk

Asterisk Dialplans
structured sequences of cmd that fired when a phone call is recived.
dialplans can be used to invoke native asterisk cmd or even system cmd
typically dialplan would play 'music-on-hold' while agent busy

ACD(Automatic call distribution)
asterisk will distribute calls based on pre-decided sequence b/w a queue of agents

sequence can be First-come-1st-serve, round-robin or randome one.

AMI
asterisk managment interface.

set of APIs that allow you to control asterisk server from remote location.

ameyo application server control asterisk service using this AMI

Asterisk Features
IVR interactive voice response
AMI -asterisk managment interfacce,
 AGI - , 
DIALPLANS, 
VOICE, 
CALL ROUTING, 
ACD, 
Automated attendant - voice kind of thing, 
FAX  

VOIP - voice over internet protocol - is communicatino protocol & transmission technique, whice delvr of voice communication or multimedia session over internet

PST line - analoge line -exchange line- for signal transmission

VOIP use below protocol for exchanging the signals and voice
SIP - Session initiation protocol
RTP - real time transport protocol
SDP - session description protocol


The SDP Protocol explained

The SDP protocol can be split into three parts. The first part advertises the session details and is called Session description, the second part is called Time description which advertises timing details related to the session and the last part is called Media description, which advertises details about the media which will be streamed in an advertised session. Below is a list of the syntax used in the SDP protocol.

Session Description

    v= (protocol version)
    o= (owner/creator and session identification).
    s= (session name)
    i= (session information)*
    u= (URI of description)*
    e=(email address  contact detail)*
    p= (phone number  contact detail)*
    c= (connection information  not required if included in media description)*
    b= (session bandwidth information)*
    z= (time zone adjustments)*
    k= (encryption key)*
    a= (zero or more session attribute lines)*

Time description

    t= (time the session is active)
    r= (repeat times)*

Media description

    m= (media name/ transport address)
    i= (media title)*
    c= (connection information  not required if included in session description)*
    b= (bandwidth information)*
    k= (encryption key)*
    a= (zero or more media attribute lines)*


SIP -basic sip flow ........5060------------5060
5060-xx.1.15 ------->invite,SDP(g711U,g711A,g729)-->1.14 inviting the provider with codec description 
5060<---------100 trying-----
5060<------------180 ringing--------
5060<--------200 ok SDP (g711U, g711A,g729)--------
5060-------------------ACK------------>
5004<------------RTP(g711U)-----------   voice only
5004---------RTP(g711U)------------>
5060<---------bye----------------
5060--------------200 ok---------->

all sip message goes 5060
RTP 5004 - its UDP kind of packet - we can define range of RTP port 10000-20000, 5000-10000,
accrodingly it will establise connection


Answers to SIP messages are in the digital format like in the http protocol. Here are the most important ones:

    1XX  information messages (100  trying, 180  ringing, 183  progress)
    2XX  successful request completion (200  OK)
    3XX  call forwarding, the inquiry should be directed elsewhere (302  temporarily moved, 305  use proxy)
    4XX  error (403  forbidden)
    5XX  server error (500  Server Internal Error)
    6XX  global failure


SIP configuration Params
1. Session-timers
2. qualify
3. externip
4. NAT
5. Localnet
6. Registration timeout
7. Jitter Buffer

Session -timer --- refereshing endpoint session periodically 
The SIP session timer is an extension of the SIP protocol that allows end-points and proxies to refresh a session periodically.
session-timer=["accept","originate","refuse"]
session-expires=[integer]
session-minse=[integer]
session-refresher=["uas","uac"]

RTP (Real time protocol)
Voice travels in form of RTP packets which are generally UDP type packets in nature.

Qualify
Asterisk will send a SIP Options cmd regularly to check that the device is still online.

If the device does not answer within the configured (or default) period(in ms) Asterisk considers the device off-line for future calls.

NAT
if a peer is configured with nat=yes, it caused Asterisk to ignore the address information in the SIP and SDP headers from this peer, and reply to the sender's 
IP address and port

Ex:
Softphone(Private) --(Private)NAT(Public)----(Public)Asterisk
nat=yes is set for the entity in sip.conf
Asterisk sees that nat=yes so it sends response on the basis of IP layer application layer.

Jitter
1. Packets are received with delay(obvious)
2. Variation in this packet delay is said to cause jitter
3. Jitter valuse is a complex formula that gives the effect of jitter in ms.
4. Each packet depends on the previous packet arrival time for jitter calculation 

Jitter Buffer
A jitter buffer temporarily stores arriving packets in order to minimize delay variations.

If packets arrive too late then they are discarded. A jitter buffer may be mis-configured and be either too large or too small

PRI - Primary rate interface
PRI is telecommunciation intferface standard primarily used in integrated services digital networks(ISDNs) and is basically a service provided for larger enterprise users. PRI lines are high-capacity service carried on T1 or E1 trunks lines, depending on the country, b/w  the telcommunications provider's central service station and the customers end.

T1 have 24  channel
E1 have 31 channel E1 are used in india

PRI Card
Digital telephony card series transports voice, as well as data, and makes voice and data integration easy.It is used to terminate E1 line and provide  SIP to server, Sangoma and digium are two wellknown vendors

Media Gateway
A media gateway is a translation device or service  that coverts media stream b/w  disparte telecommunications technolgies  such as POTS, SS7, Next generation networks (2G,2.5G, 3G radio access networks) or private branch exchange (PBX) systems. media gateways enable multimedia communications across packet networks using transport protocols such as Asynchronous transfer modem(ATM) and internet  protocol(ip)

because the media gateway connects different types of networks, one of its main functions is to convert b/w different transmission and coding techniques. media streaming fuctions such as echo cancellation, DTMF, and tone sender are also located in the media gateway.
Sangoma, Patton, Digium, Dinstare wellknown vendor.

q1
sangoma, patton, digium, dinstar
gsm gateway is a big device with multiple slot togethor on 1 place and use for calling through mobile network, in gsm gateway, we will insert sim card for calling purpose, Gsm gateway is also flexiable, we can re-size according to our use, by inserting/removing sim cards. and its also cost effective.

PRI is primary rate interface, its digital telephony card, it transfer voice and data both. its use ISDNs line.
PRI line like E1 - 31 channel
T1- 24 channel
 
q2
SIP- session initiation protocol is a signaling protocol that carry voice and multimedia like traffic also, 
ISDNs - Integrated Services Digital Networks, its old type of circuit-switching network, PRI line works on ISDNs line.
sip flow
INVITE - SDP(G729,G711), we give codec information  - to provider
TRYING - 100 trying - call trying from provider end
RINGING - 180 ringing - call rings, it inform by provider end
OK - 200 ok is acknowlege
RTP - voice traffic transmitting b/w provider and you.
BYE. - call finished by you or cx end.

q3
What is SIP/VOIP registration. Please explain the difference
between IP bases and Username/password based SIP.
sip Registration means  where the endpoint sends  request to SIP REGISTER(SIP SERVER) or VoIP provider to let it know where it is.
Sip registeration authenticate method can be ip base or userid/password base 

IP Based- does not authenticate with the SIP Trunk
ID and Password - provide Authentication ID and Password to register and/or make outbound calls, as set in the SIP Trunk settings

SIP URL- who are you in SIP, to locate an endpoint, exam:-
4042265555@192.168.1.120
4042265555@voipdomain.com

SIP registration proces
Endpoint		SIP server
----------Register-------->
<---------401 unauthorized---
--------Register--------->
<-------200 OK------------

q4 
its digital telephony card, that transport voice and data, its use on E1, and T1 line
A PRI Card is used to connect PRI lines to IP PBX/ IP Telephony Server so that all the IP Phones/ Analog phones (extensions) can make outgoing calls or receive incoming calls using it. pri cards - sangoma, digium, 

For its configuration, we have to download the latest package of dahdi/libpri/wanpipe.
Then we have to install it.
Then we have to upgrade the Kernel by update command.
Then we have to start the services and our call server as well.
And in the last we have to verify the working status of PRI


q5
coder-decoder or compression-decompression, its compress and decompress voice, digital data etc. its usefull because different codec consume different bandwidth, and provide different level of quality. so we choose codec according to our requirment.

q6
IP phones - is hard phone, that is we use for voip calling, 
softphone - its a soft phone, that we use for voip calling in laptop, like zoiper, xlite.


https://sites.google.com/a/ameyo.com/engineering/Home/sip-debugging

https://sites.google.com/a/ameyo.com/engineering/Home/l3knowledgebase/analyzing-wanpipe-pri-log

 VoIP packet capturing and Analyzing/SIP+RTP Analaysis 
https://sites.google.com/a/ameyo.com/engineering/Home/l3knowledgebase/l3trainingarticles/voip-analysis-using-tshark


For full call logs from wireshark

nohup tcpdump -i any -Z root port 5060 or portrange 10000-20000 -s65535 -C 1000 -W 100 -w /dacx/debug/skilltesting.pcap &

-vv verbose output:  tcpdump -vv
You can specify the number of packets to be captured using the -c option
tcpdump -c 10

Use the -D option to print a list of all available network interfaces that tcpdump can collect packets from:
tcpdump -D

-i option followed by the interface name or the associated index. For example, to capture all packets from all interfaces

tcpdump performs reverse DNS resolution on IP addresses and translates port numbers into names. Use the -n option to disable the translation:

tcpdump -n -i any > file.out

Understanding the tcpdump Output 
[Timestamp] [Protocol] [Src IP].[Src Port] > [Dst IP].[Dst Port]: [Flags], [Seq], [Ack], [Win Size], [Options], [Data Length]

tcpdump Filters #

Filtering by Protocol

To restrict the capture to a particular protocol, specify the protocol as a filter. For example, to capture only the UDP traffic, you would run:
 tcpdump -n udp
tcpdump -n proto 17		another way

Filtering by Host #
To capture only packets related to a specific host, use the host qualifier:
sudo tcpdump -n host 192.168.1.185

The host can be either an IP address or a name.

You can also filter the output to a given IP range using the net qualifier. For example, to dump only packets related to 10.10.0.0/16 you would use:
sudo tcpdump -n net 10.10

Filtering by Port

To limit capture only to packets from or to a specific port, use the port qualifier. The command below captures packets related to the SSH (port 22) service by using this command:

sudo tcpdump -n port 23

The portrange qualifier allows you to capture traffic in a range of ports:

sudo tcpdump -n portrange 110-150


Complex Filters #

and (&&), or (||), and not (!) operators.
sudo tcpdump -n src 192.168.1.185 and tcp port 80
sudo tcpdump -n 'host 192.168.1.185 and (tcp port 80 or tcp port 443)'

Reading and Writing Captures to a File

Another useful feature of tcpdump is to write the packets to a file. This is handy when you are capturing a large number of packets or capturing packets for later analysis.

To start writing to a file, use the -w option followed by the output capture file:

This command above will save the capture to a file named data.pcap. You can name the file as you want, but it is a common convention to use the .pcap extension (packet capture).

When the -w option is used, the output is not displayed on the screen. tcpdump writes raw packets and creates a binary file that cannot be read with a regular text editor.

To inspect the contents of the file, invoke tcpdump with the -r option:

sudo tcpdump -r data.pcap


he capture file can also be inspected with other packet analyzer tools such as Wireshark.

When capturing packets over a long period of time, you can enable file rotation. tcpdump allows you to create new files and rotate the dump file on a specified time interval or fixed size. The following command will create up to ten 200MB files, named file.pcap0, file.pcap1, and so on: before overwriting older files.

sudo tcpdump -n -W 10 -C 200 -w /tmp/file.pcap

If you want to start tcpdump at a specific time, you can use a cronjob . tcpdump doesnt have an option to exit after a given time. You can use the timeout command to stop tcpdump after some time. For example, to exit after 5 minutes, you would use:

sudo timeout 300 tcpdump -n -w data.pcap



Twilio Flex

..........................................
https://scrolltest.com/2018/12/15/api-testing-tutorial/#more-1431

what is REST API?
Rest is acronym for Representational state transfer.
The REST architectural style describes six constraints.
These constraints, put on the architecture, 

In simple terms REST API nothing but a design pattern for web API
Uniform Interface - they should communicate with same resource like json, xml, html , txt)
Stateless  - dont worry about the state of the request or response..
Cacheable  - api hit can cache or not?  implicitly or explicitly, define themselves as cacheable. Its up to server when they want the cache to expired etc.
Client-server - 
Layered System -between client and server there can be any number of layered systems it does not matter.
Code on Demand  - The server can store the Code or logic to themselves and transfer it whenever needed rather client-side logic.



what is API?

Type of API testing in API Testing?
Functional testing
Integration testing.  - UI + API
Regression Testing - check working of old with new
Security Testing  - Like pass security testing
Load Testing  -  put load
Penetration Testing - like mysql attack, brute force
Fuzz testing - discover coding error 


Http Request Components

Resource URI - URL or endpoints
Headers - Client to server -  contains few of header, these header could be like request you are sending data or not, json or not?, someother lang. or not?, length of the request
Authorization  - on server end could be like api key, token
Body - send a request, it goes with somedata, that data is kind of body, body could be like in json


Http request structure cont.
- Resource URI/ endpoint

			Base URI 
	host URI			Resource	Query Params
https://example.com			users		?email=abc@gmail.com
https://example.com/userapi/v1/users?email=abc@gmail.com

https://example.com/userapi/v1/users/{resourceID}

Host URI - https://example.com - it will google.com, facebook.com
Base URI - https://example.com/userapi/v1/ - its containts starting point of the api, it will not change accrose all endpoints

Resource - its need actually, - what element you reqesting actually, like profile detail, - its pool of data where you fetching something, or where you want to create an entry, like you want to fetch your all twitter messages, so messages is your resource

Query Param - Where you filtering data, let say you are fetching your bank transaction, so you dont want to fetch all transaction, you just want to fetch only 1 querter transaction, so that is query params, filter could be single param, or multiple params, so query param are kind of filter

Path Param -  example.com/userapi/v1/users/{resourceID}

Scenrio - if you know the Resource Id of user, you can use Path Param, if you dont know, you can use Query Param

URL - Uniform Resource Locator
URN - Uniform Resource Name
URI - Uniform Resource Identifier



Arha
8008441229


Dear Customer,

As discussed on 8008441229, you are installing VPN, if any issue you will update on the ticket.

Regards
Manjeet 


MOSL Analysis || DCA20210618156751


Dear Customer,

As discussed with you, how many key you required, please share requirment, so we will create and update you.

Regards
Manjeet



DCA20210617156652 System media hangup count 50% on Transfer calls

Hi Mritunjay,

Apology for the inconvinience.

We working on the analysis from the backend. We will update you by EOD today once we identified the root cause.

Regards,
Rukunuddin Siddique



DCA20210617156720  IVRS-Feedback Report Error

DCA20210618156744 Delay on call response
Hi Josphe,

As discussed overcall, you are facing a delay in call response. The CRM page appears to be disconnected but on the mobile the call rings after that.

This issue is mostly happening for agents who are logged in on the Web and not for mobile application users.
it happening with who is the agent is log in with the system.
we will check and update you.

Regards,
Sahdev Mandal


DCA20210618156819 Same ticket is getting reopened

DCA20210618156840 Calls are not getting forwarded properly
Case Description:Calls are not getting forwarded from Campaign DID: 08035523175 to Ready Assist's campaign (08047185246)



Pondal - 

8106058189

Dear Customer,

As discussed with you, we have shared the key, and also provided the VPN training also how to install vpn key and connect.

Regards
Manjeet

hariprasad@openworld
joshi@openworld
mahender@openworld
sangeetha@openworld
suryam@openworld
swapna@openworld
insuranceinb8@yahoo.com
insuranceinb7@yahoo.com


Dear Rajendra,

As discussed with you, we have provided you VPN key, and given demo how to connect VPN key.

Regards
Manjeet

Dear Shaikh,

As discuss with you, please share the sample number with timestamp, so we will see if call receive in ameyo or not?, and we will share hour analysis.

Regards
Manjeet


Dear Hima,

As discussed with you, there some invaild number callback scheduled, so we have deleted now, these number will not dial again.

Regards
Manjeet


9501191026


DCA20210617156607


Dear 



Test Call Data - MK
Call Disconnecting On TATA Mumbai || 02268059000
External

Dear Sharon,

We have checked for given sample number, so we checked for given sample number time is not matching we receie call on different timestamp, and few call receive on approx time given below where some places no input receive, and on 2 calls receive input that is 3 only, 

And for 1 number we dont receive any call in last 3-4 days like 9717072870.


       date_added        |   phone    | call_result |    hangup_details     | customer_input 
-------------------------+------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------------
 2021-06-19 11:48:46.288 | 9953810330 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | G=,3
 2021-06-17 11:37:55.828 | 9953810330 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | G=,3
 2021-06-17 11:32:42.6   | 9953810330 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | 
(3 rows)


       date_added        |   phone    | call_result |    hangup_details     | customer_input 
-------------------------+------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------------
 2021-06-18 12:03:39.541 | 9815971201 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | 
 2021-06-18 09:34:42.921 | 9815971201 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | 
 2021-06-17 10:18:53.136 | 9815971201 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | 


       date_added        |   phone    | call_result |    hangup_details     |       customer_input       
-------------------------+------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------------------------
 2021-06-17 11:14:46.571 | 7877998899 | SUCCESS     | AGENT_HANGUP_PHONE    | G=,3;G=,*;G=,1;G=:NIR;G=,9
 2021-06-16 18:09:22.296 | 7877998899 | FAILURE     | CUSTOMER_HANGUP_PHONE | 
(2 rows)

Proficient with testing REST APIs.


create project

in src create package

project and package name should be same

in package create class 

package javaTutorial;

public static void(String[] args) {
// 1000 Auto-generated method stub
	System.out.println();
   }
}

void - not returning anything, 
static means non object class - we cant create object of this class



/var/www/html/Modules/WhatsappApi/Lib
whatsappapi.php

php artisan cache:clear



One of condition should be true, return type should be different or parameter should be different. like given below

define char array

char[] = new char[5];


Scanner class is java.util so to invoke it we need to import java.util.Scanner;

A consrtuctor spacial type of method, its name depend on class name

when creating object, at the time we are creating object we want to initilize all instance at same time we can use constructor.


public class Car extends Vehicle
Means Car is child and Vehicle is parent so child class is inherting properties of parent Vehicle class

Now if we create object of child class, we can invoke parent class method and as well as child class



kubernetes
ctrl+p
ctrl+q to come outside from container and container will be in running state


docker run -it --name c1 centos /bin/bash

docker ps

docker ps -a 

docker container run -it --name c1 centos /bin/bash


GCP (GKE)

AWS (EKS)

Azure (AKS)

Minikube(1 Node)

3 (Node kubernetes cluster)


kubectl get nodes

kubectl get nodes -o wide

kubectl get pods

kubectl get pods -o wide

kubectl describe pods/OS/webserver

kubectl describe pods/OS/webserver | tail

kubectl create -f create-pod-with-os.yaml

kubectl exec -it webserver sh		it will take 1st container of the POD

kubectl exec -it -c web webserver sh	it will take name os1 container of OS pod

kubectl exec -it -c web webserver -- sh

kubectl delete -f file.yaml	

kubectl exec -it webserver sh

kubectl delete pod/browser

create a pod with image

kubectl run webserver --image=nginx:alpine --restart=Never			it will create the pod and image in it

kubectl run curl --rm --restart=Never --image=vipin2411/curl -it --sh		it will create the pod and enter in interactive mode


Kubernetes ReplicaSets
creating pods at scale
when need to create pods on large scale 
if said replica set need to keep 3 pod running that is replica set responsiblity


pod yaml

apiVersion:v1			API Version 
kind: Pod			kind of resource, pod,deployment service
metadata:			metadata about resource
	name: OS		pod name
spec:				describes desired behavior of resource
	containers:
	-name: OS		container name
	image: centos		imange name in container



apiVersion:v1			
kind: Pod			
metadata:			
	name: OS		
spec:				
	containers:
	-name: OS		
	image: centos		

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: os
spec:
  containers:
  - name: os
    image: centos



apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
        name: browser
spec:
     containers:
             - name: curl
               image: vipin2411/curl
               imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
               command: ['sh','-c','echo Pod running;sleep 7200']


pod with port

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: webserver
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
spec:
 containers:
 - name: web
   image: nginx:1.16-alpine
   ports:
   - containerPort: 80


Pod to pod comm
create 2 pod curl, webserver
from curl pod access webserver by elink browser


Node to pod comm

enter in node
 gcloud compute ssh --zone us-central1-c gke-mycluster-default-pool-fa26e0c8-l2wd --project  apt-tracker-315210

create a pod with port on that is on different node or its just a pod

after entering in another node, curl http://pod_ip


multi container pod

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: webserver
 labels:
 app: nginxweb
 type: production
 ver:v1
spec:
 containers:
 - name: web
   image: nginx:1.16-alpine
 - name: curl
   image: vipin2411/curl
   command: ["/bin/bash","-c","while:;do curl http://localhost:80/;sleep 15;done"]

after creating pod by yaml

how to check logs
kubectl logs -c curl pod/webserver | less

now enter in curl pod and try to access webpage on port 80

Kubernetes ReplicaSets
creating pods at scale

pod using replicaset

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: ReplicaSet
metadata:
 name: webserver-rs
spec:
 replicas: 3
 selector:
  matchLabels:
   app: nginxweb
 template:
  metadata:
   labels:
    app: nginxweb
    env: development
  spec:
   containers:
    name: web
    image: nginx:1.16-alpine

cat pod-using-replicaset.yaml

kubectl create -f pod-using-replicaset.yaml


kubectl get rs

kubectl get pods -o wide


kubectl get pods --show-labels


ReplicaSet command line

kubectl scale rs webserver-rs --replicas=6		scale the num of pod - 6

kubectl delete rs webserver-rs --cascade=false		want to delete replicaset, but want pods keep running

kubectl create -f pod-using-replicaset.yaml		it will control all mention replicaset in yaml, as selector

kubectl delete rs webserver-rs --cascade=true		when delete replicaset and pods both


Deployment

its high level object then replicaset, when need to change version etc, after 1st app deplyment, we need to further update app again.

pod-using-deployment

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
 name: webserver-d
 spec:
  selector:
   matchLabels:
    app: nginxweb
   replicas: 3
   template:
    metadata:
     labels:
      app: nginxweb
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: web
        image: nginx:1.16-alpine
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80

Deployment Commands

cat pod-using-deployment.yaml			

kubectl create -f pod-using-deplyment.yaml
	
kubectl get deployment/webserver-d			get info. about webserver-d 3 out 3 available?

kubectl get rs						when create deply one rs object auto get create manage pods

kubectl get rc						get info about any replication control (rc) no rc avai the rc was used earlier manage pods

kubectl get deploy

kubectl get pods -o wide

kubectl describe deploy

kubectl describe deploy/webserver-d



scalling in deploy

vi pod-using-deploy.yaml

kubectl apply -f pod-using-deploy.yaml

kubectl get deploy 

kubectl delete -f pod-using-deploy.yaml

kubectl get deploy

kubectl scale deployment webserver-d --replicas=6

kubectl get deploy,rs


kubernetes Deployment Strategy - rolling update, cannery, blue green, fixed etc


webserver-rolling-update.yaml

apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment	
metadata: webserver
spec:
 minReadySeconds: 10			min num of sec pod should be in healthy state
 progressDeadlineSeconds:300		max num of sec deplmnt progress can take before consider failed
 revisionHistoryLimit: 3		max revisions to be maintained at revision history 
 replica: 3				
 selector:	
  matchLabels:				type of selector to use match label or match expr.
   app: nginxweb			pod matching this label will be handled by this replicaset
  strategy:				strategy to use for replacing old pods with new ones
   rollingUpdate:	
    maxSurge: 1				max pods above desired pods
    maxUnavailable: 1			max pods that can remain unavailable during update
   type: RollingUpdate			type of strategy
  template:				pod template/configuration
   metadate:				metadata about pod
    labels:
     apps: nginxweb			pod label
     type: production			pod label
     ver: v1
   spec:				describe desire behaviour of pod
    containers:				
    - image: vipin2411/nginx-alpine:v1	image of container
      name: web				container name
    ports:				
    - containerPort: 80			container port
      protocol: TCP			
    readinessProbe:			kind of probe to check when the app is ready to receive traffic
    httpGet:				type of probe
     path: /				path to ping http response 200-300 considered success
     port: 80				port to ping
    initialDelaySeconds: 30 		time to wait before sending probes
    timeoutSeconds: 10			time after which probe will timeout	
    periodSeconds: 5			time interval b/w probes
    successThreshold: 1			min continous successful probes required for making pod ready
    failureThreshold: 2			num of continous failed probe needed to mark pod as unready
  restartPolicy: Arrays			container will get restarted if got terminatedgclo



If we want to service come from internet, need to use service object
trafic forward to pod  cluster ip, node port, loadbalancer?

rolling-update-service.yaml

apiVersion: v1		API version
kind: Service		kind of resource	
metadata:		metadata about service
name: web-ru		service name
spec:			describe desired behaviour of service
 selector:		type of selector to use	
  app: nginxweb		pod matching this label
 ports:			
 - protocol: TCP	proto. 
   port: 80		port exposed by service inside cluster
   targetPort: 80	port exposed by pods selected by service
 type: LoadBalancer	type of service


service Type "LoadBalancer"

cat rolling-update-service.yaml

kubectl apply -f rolling-update-service.yaml	create service web-ru of LoadBalancer type from yaml file

kubectl get svc/web-ru			initially the external-ip is in pendng state bcz creating LB taks time, again chk aftsome time 1 real ip shown

kubectl describe svc/web-ru			give usefull info regarding service obj.


kubectl rollout status deployment webserver	if any rollout is happing, it will show the status

kubectl rollout history deployment webserver	it show Revision history


Rollback

kubectl rollout status deployment webserver				gives rollout history
						
kubectl rollout history deployment webserver				shows rolling update history
			
kubectl rollout undo deployment/webserver				rollback to previous
	
kubectl rollout undo deployment/webserver --to-revision=1		rollback to v1

For sometime both v2 and v1 will be available. After successful rollback, only v1


Kubernetes Services
ClusterIP, NodePort, LoadBalancer - sending traffice to pods

ClusterIP, - A virtual private internal IP address is allocated to service. This IP can be used only within the cluster. Pods and nodes in cluster can access can access this IP address. If we are not going to specify service type during object creation time, default ClusterIP is chosen. The external clients can not access the service IP.

NodePort: A port is dynamically allocated from port range 30000-32768 to each node of the cluster and any one can access pods using these nodesip:nodeport combination. NodePort itself behind the scenes uses ClusterIP to send the traffic to pods. when we send the request to nodeip:nodeport, it is forwarded to clusterip:serviceport and finally forwarded to podip:targetport combination. The problem with NodePort is that if there are 3 node in cluster we may have to use 3 combinations of nodeip:nodeport, which is again difficult.

LoadBalancer: By default, no load balancer is available internally in Kubernetes. We have to use external Load balancer (LB) from cloud providers such as AWS, GCP or Azure. LB behind the scene creates NodePort service and just load balancer the Traffic to nodeip:nodeport combinations.


Kubernete ClusterIP

cat pod-service-cip.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: web-cip
spec: 
 selector:
  app: nginxweb
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: ClusterIP


kubectl apply -f pod-service-cip.yaml

kubectl get svc				service object

kubectl get svc/web-cip

kubectl describe svc/web-cip

1st run a pod
kubectl create -f pod-with-port.yaml

then run pod-service-cip.yaml

after that check endpoint and try to check if you are able to login, but you cant becz its cluster ip within cluster

then try to access from another node by login on another node, and you are able to do this


Node Port 

pod-service-np.yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: web-np
spec:
 selector:
  app: nginxweb
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
 type: NodePort

NodePort service commands

cat pod-service-np.yaml		service web-np, nodeport, selector is label "app=nginxweb" select "webserver" pod that already runng, & label "app=nginxweb"

kubectl apply -f pod-service-np.yaml 		create service obj. when we create nodeport type of service, on each cluster node one port get allocated dynamically from port range 30000-32768. now external clients can connect by using combination nodeip:nodeport

kubectl get svc/web-np		nodeport is allocated. also note that "ClusterIP" was created behind the scene having virtual IP and service port 80 

In the end delete the service "web-np"

kubectl get svc/web-np

kubectl get svc/web-np -o wide

kubectl describe svc/web-np

gcloud compute firewall-rules create rule-up --allow tcp:31765 --project  apt-tracker-315210


1st create pod with port, then run pod-service-np and after that open firewall for nodeport, and after that check on browser with node ip with port number, its accessable on all ip with same port.

also go to another node and access with curl with cluster ip 


NodePort fixed port

apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
 name: web-np-fp
spec:
 selector:
  app: nginxweb
 ports:
 - protocol: TCP
   port: 80
   targetPort: 80
   nodePort: 31080
 type: NodePort

pod-service-np-fixedport.yaml

cat pod-service-np-fixedpoint.yaml

kubectl apply -f pod-service-np-fixedport.yaml

kubectl get svc/web-np-fp

kubectl get ep/web-np-fp		endpoint


1st create pod with port, then run pod-service-np-fixedport and after that open firewall for nodeport that is fixed, and after that check on browser with node ip with fixed port number, its accessable on all node ip with same port.

also go to another node and access with curl with cluster ip 


Pod used for load balancer

webserver-pod-v1.yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
 name: webserver-v1
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
  type: production
  ver: v1
 spec:
  containers:
  - name: web
    image: vipin2411/nginx-alpine:v1
    ports:
    - containerPort: 80

webserver-pod-v2.yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata: 
 name: webserver-v2
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
  type: production
  ver: v2
 spec:
  containers:
  - name: web
    image: vipin2411/nginx-alpine:v2
    ports:
    - containerPort: 80

webserver-pod-v3.yaml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata: 
 name: webserver-v3
 labels:
  app: nginxweb
  type: production
  ver: v3
 spec:
  containers:
  - name: web
    image: vipin2411/nginx-alpine:v3
    ports:
    - containerPort: 80

cmd

cat webserver-pod-v1.yaml
cat webserver-pod-v2.yaml
cat webserver-pod-v3.yaml

kubectl apply -f webserver-pod-v1.yaml
kubectl apply -f webserver-pod-v2.yaml
kubectl apply -f webserver-pod-v3.yaml

kubectl get pods -o wide
kubectl get pods --show-labels


pod-service-lb.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata: 
 name: web-lb
spec:
 selector:
  app: nginxweb
 ports:
  protocol: TCP
  port: 80
 type: LoadBalancer

run 3 pod with different version 1,2,3, run loadbalancer service, and check now loadbalancer ip

kubectl get svc/web-lb

 
Practice Kubernetes

How many PODs exist on the system? (in the current(defaul) namespace) - on master node?

Sol check on master node, - kubectl get pds? - zero

Create 	a new pod with the NGINX image? imange name:nginx

Sol, we can create pod defination file or run cmd

kubectl run nginx --image:nginx

How many pods are created now? Note: we have created a few more pods. so please check again.

Sol kubectl get pods

Wht is the image used to create the new pods? you  must look at one of the new pods in detail to figure this out.

Sol. kubectl describe pod newpods-xxxx

Which nodes are these pods placed on? you must look at all the pods in detail to figure this out

SOl. kubectl get pods -o wide

How many containers are part of the pod 'webapp'? Note: we just created a new POD.

SOl. kubectl get pods 	get pods 1/2  then check with describe
     kubectl describe pod webapp
     check under container section

what images are used in the new 'webapp' pod? you must look at all the pods in detail to figure this out?

 SOl. kubectl describe pod webapp
      check under container section you will see images name

What is the state of the container 'agentx' in the pod webapp? wait for it to finish the 'ContainCreating' state

Sol. kubectl describe pod webapp
      check under container section you will see images name agentx and then check state

Why do you think the container 'agentx' in pod 'webapp' is in error? try to figure it out from the events section of the pod

Sol kubectl describe pod webapp
      check under container section you will see images name and state also, and below state there is reason also
      if reason is not clear then check events in describe

What does the READY column in the output of the 'kubectl get pods' cmd  indicate?

Sol its show total and running pods


Delete the webapp Pod. once deleted wait for the pod fully terminate.

Sol kubectl delete pod webapp

Create a new pod with the name 'redis' and with the image 'redis123' use a pod-defination YAML file. And yes the image name is wrong

vi redis-pod.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: redis
spec:
  containers:
  - name: redis
    image: redis123

kubectl create -f redis-pod.yaml

Now fix the image on the pod to 'redis'. update the pod-definition file and use 'kubectl apply' cmd or use 'kubectl edit pod redis' cmd

Sol kubectl edit pod redis
search for image and change it


How many ReplicaSets exist on the system?

SOl. kubectl get replicasets

How many Pods are desired in the new-replica-set?

SOl. kubectl get replicasets  check desired column

what is the images used to create the pods in the new-replica-set?

Sol. kubectl describe replicaset	check under container image mentioned

How many Pods are Ready in the new-replica-set?

SOl. kubectl get replicasets  		check ready column

why do you think the Pods are not ready?

Sol  kubectl describe replicaset	check replicas current/desired just below Pod status running/waiting/Success/failed, then check event 4 port created or not?

check again status 
kubectl get pods 			if status like imagepullbackoff. not sure about this, dig in for 1 pod

kubectl describe pod new-replica-set-xxxx 	and check the event of this pod, you will get the error reason

Delete one from 4 pods?

Sol.kubectl delete pod new-replica-set-xxx


try to create a replicaset-defination from yaml file. and you got below error?

kubectl create -f replicaset-defination.yaml 
error: unable to recognize "replicaset-definition.yaml" no matches for kind "ReplicaSet" in version "v1"

SOl. ReplicaSet is part of apps/v1 not v1, go to documentation and search with ReplicaSet 

try to create a replicaset-defination from 2nd yaml file. and you got below error?

kubectl create -f replicaset-defination-2.yaml 
The ReplicaSet "replicaset-2" is invalid: spec.template.metadata.labels: Invalid value: map[string]string{"tier":"nginx"}: 'selector' does not match template 'labels'

Sol check 2nd yaml file found selector label tier doesnt match to template tier label

delete replicaset

kubectl delete rs replicaset-1 replicaset-2

Fix the original replica set 'new-replica-set' to use the correct 'busybox' image (Either delete and re-create/update delete all etc?)

Sol kubectl edit rs new-replica-set		search for image there you  see busybox777, correct it to busybox
check again

kubectl get pods		still you see its in same state, so here you have 2 option

option
1st delete each pod it will create new pod automatically 
2nd delete replica set, and create a new replica set

scale the ReplicaSet to 5 PODs
use kubectl scale command or edit the replicaset using "kubectl edit"

Sol. kubectl scale rs new-replica-set --replicas=5

Now scale the replicaset down 2 Pods

sol. kubectl scale rs new-replica-set --replicas=2



Replication Controller

apiVersion: v1
kind: ReplicationController
metadata:
  name: myapp-rc
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      name: nginx
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80


Labels and selectors

metadata:			label that create criteria
 name: myapp-pod
 labels:
  tier: front-end


selector:			from which we can select labels define when creating the pod
 matchLabels:
  tier: front-end


Namespaces
Pods 
services
Deployment  

that we are doing inside a namspace, we are doing inside a house, this is known as default namespace, and its create automattically when kubernetes setup 1st time


kube-system
kube-system is the namespace for objects created by the Kubernetes system.
Typically, this would contain pods like kube-dns, kube-proxy, kubernetes-dashboard and stuff like fluentd, heapster, ingresses and so on.


default The default namespace for objects with no other namespace
web-pod, db-server, web-deployment   mysql.connect("db-service")
access in another namespace, mysql.connect("db-service.dev.svc.cluster.local")	this DNS entry added automat when its created
cluster.local 	domain
svc		service
dev		namspace
db-service	service-name

kube-system The namespace for objects created by the Kubernetes system

kube-public This namespace is created automatically and is readable by all users (including those not authenticated). This namespace is mostly reserved for cluster usage, in case that some resources should be visible and readable publicly throughout the whole cluster. The public aspect of this namespace is only a convention, not a requirement.

kube-node-lease This namespace for the lease objects associated with each node which improves the performance of the node heartbeats as the cluster scales

Namespace Resoure Limits


create & view pod in namespae

kubectl get pods 			it will list all pods within in same namspace
kubectl get pods --namespace=kube-syst		list kube-system name space pods
	

kubectl create -f pod-defination.yaml			create pod in default or same namespace
kubectl create -f pod-defination.yaml -namespace=dev	create pod in dev namespace, or add namespace in metadata 


how you create namespace
namespace-dev.yml

apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
 name: dev

kubectl create namespace dev	

switch into another namespace
kubectl config set-context $(kubectl config current-context) --namespace=dev
kubectl get pods --all-namespaces

